Title: 2604.18384v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.18384v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 02:40:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 36

Markdown Content:
1

NEMO: Neural Electro -Mechano -Optic Sensors for Multiplexed Neural Interfaces 

Andrew Cochra n1, Harshvardhan Gupta 1, Vishal Jain 1,2 , Maysamreza Chamanzar 1,2 , Gianluca 

Piazza 1.

1.  Department  Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, 

Pittsburgh, USA  15213 

2.  Neuroscience Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, USA 

Abstract 

We introduce a novel electro -optomechanic neural sensor for realizing ultra -compact neural 

recording probes that can detect and relay electrophysiology signals from within neural tissue. 

This technology addresses outstanding challenges faced by existing ne ural recording 

technologies, including the resolution trade -off with signal -to -noise -ratio (SNR) due to the 

high impedances of small electrodes, and lingering stimulation artifacts. The sensor employs a 

highly miniaturized NEMS (nano -electromechanical syst ems) electrostatic transducer that 

modulates a silicon photonic microdisk resonator to convert electrical signals to an optical 

signal modulation . We have been able to achieve a limit of detection down to 1 10 microvolts, 

making the sensor sensitive enough to detect neural signals. This sensitive electro -

optomechanic sensor directly detects electrophysiology signals and converts them to 

optomechanic modulation for effective transmission to outside the brain, wh ich provides the 

unique potential for massive mu ltiplexing of neural recordings. This design eliminates the 

need for bulky backend headstages that limit neural recording on awake free -roaming 

subjects . The ability of the device to record electrophysiological signals has been 

demonstrated using benchtop characterization and ex -vivo recordings from live neural tissue. 2

Introduction 

Recording electrophysiological signals with high spatiotemporal resolution across multiple 

brain regions is essential for understanding how information is encoded and transformed 

within the central nervous system 1-4. Needle -like implantable neural probes, equipped with an 

array of microscopic electrodes, offer the highest spatial and temporal resolution for recording 

signals from within the brain 5,6 . These electrodes, which are often much smaller than a single 

neuron, record the changes in electric potential due to transient variations in the electric field 

and ion concentrations within the neural tissue. Given the intricate connectivity in the brain, it 

is not only desirable to finely resolve neuronal activity in spe cific regions but also to do so 

simultaneously in different areas of the brain 4,7 -9. This necessitates multiple probes implants, 

which is very challenging with due to the size of state -of -the -art probes 10 -15 .

Despite significant advancements over the past decade in the scaling of neural probes, 

core design concepts have largely remained unchanged. Passive probes consist of micro 

electrode arrays connected to conductive wires along the probe’s length, which end in a 

connector that attaches to a headstage. The headstage, a printed circuit board (PCB) , has 

neural amplifiers, multiplexers, and digitizers that condition and transmit data over digital 

interfaces to a computer. This approach currently limits passive co mmercial probes to 128 

channels per implant due to the large PCB fanout and the number of connections that need to 

be made to the headstage 16,17 . The headstage, weighing between 800 milligrams to 3 grams, is 

physically attached to the animal’s skull using an enclosure and mount that can add several 

grams and bulk to the assembly 10 -15 . This seriously hinders the ability to have multiple 

implanted probes, especially in experiments on smaller animals like rodents and small 

primates that are commonly used in ne uroscience. Even a single implanted probe with its 

heavy backend connector, headstage, and tether can severely restrict the mobility of subjects, 

making multiple implants nearly impossible. There is a need to develop smaller and lighter 

backends that minim ize the load on the subject. 3

In addition, c onventional electrical recording systems face significant limitations in 

scaling down electrode size for smaller and denser arrays, primarily due to the relatively low 

input impedance (around 10 MΩ) of AC -coupled electronic neural amplifiers, which have a 

large input capacitance to block any DC offset. This necessitates larger recording electrodes, 

often coated with materials like PEDOT:PSS, to maintain low electrochemical impedance for 

signal capture 18 -20 . However, the degradation of these co atings and glial scarring around 

electrode surfaces can substantially increase electrode impedance, negatively impacting neural 

recording quality 21 -24 . Furthermore, a critical trade -off exists between electrode impedance 

and Signal -to -Noise Ratio (SNR). While smaller electrodes are desirable for enhanced spatial 

resolution and detecting specific cell types and signal propagation, their electrode -tissue 

interface impedance increases with decreasing size 20 . This increased impedance can become 

comparable to th e recording amplifier's input impedance, limiting gain and deteriorating SNR. 

Similarly, neural amplifiers are constrained by a trade -off between gain/SNR and dynamic 

range, making them susceptible to stimulation artifacts 25, 26 ; achieving higher gain (and SNR) 

restricts the amplifier to a small input dynamic range due to limitations in output swing range, 

device biasing, and operating voltages. 

Another consequence of the large capacitance of neural amplifiers is their long 

discharge time. Experiments often require measuring the neuronal activity that is evoked in 

response to an applied electrical stimulation, and almost all closed -loop neurostimu lation 

(CLS) paradigms involve stimulating and recording from the brain. Though relatively short 

pulses and small currents are used (100 μA – 1 mA, 100 μs – 5 ms), they can lead to potential 

swings large enough to saturate the neural amplifiers and charge up their input capacitors 25 -27 .

These are seen as stimulation artifacts in neural recordings. Though blanking circuits can be 

used to reduce these artifacts, the discharge is still a visible exponential decay, called the 

artifact tail, that can take several milliseconds to discharge and often occludes the desired 

electrophysiology signal. Techniques are used to fit exponentials to correct baselines and 4

extract the “true” neural signal, but signals are often distorted and any activity during the 

blanking period is always lost 25, 26 .

Recently, active neural probe designs have emerged that incorporate a portion of the 

headstage electronics like analog amplifiers, multiplexers, and digitizers on the probe itself. 

This approach aims to increase the channel count with greater integration embedded on the 

probe , amplifying the recorded neural signals using CMOS circuits and implementing active 

switching and low levels of multiplexing to reduce the number of interconnects 28 . This has 

allowed the number of recording electrodes to be greatly inc reased (up to about 1000 

recording electrodes per shank), but only a subset are addressable over a few 100s of channels 

(i.e. , Neuropixels 29 : 384, SiNAPS 30 : 512, NeuroSeeker 31 : 768) . While this approach 

overcomes some of the interface related limitations to achieve higher channel counts, the size 

of the headstage and the overall implant remains bulky, due to the additional electronics that 

need to be added on the headstage PCB to cont rol the on -probe circuitry (Figure 1 ). Having 

active circuits on the probe also leads to increased power consumption, and more importantly, 

increased heat generation in the brain, which is detrimental to neural tissue viability 32 .

Moreover, challenges associated with low amplifier impedance and long discharge time 

constants remain 27 .5

Figure 1. Dimensions of state -of -the -art neural probes . While the probe shank is very narrow 

(~ 100 μm) which minimizes tissue damage, the backend connectors and headstages (needed 

for fanout, digitization, and data transmission) are large . This mak es use of multiple probes 

impractical, especially in chronic applications. The NEMO sensor is a multiplexor and 

encodes the neural signal optically allowing the signals from an array of sensor to be 

transmitted over an optical fiber without the need for electronics on the backend of the probe. 

While CMOS -based neural probes have advanced the state -of -the -art with higher 

density electrodes, these techniques are reaching scalability limits. Even using smaller CMOS 

technology nodes will not fundamentally improve analog performance as gain and noise 

degrade 33 . To address these challenges, we look to a trend seen in telecommunications and 6

semiconductor technologies where copper cables and interconnects are being replaced by 

optical fibers and co -packaged photonics 34 . Optical communications is the universal standard 

for ultra -high bandwidth communication where multiple electrical channels can be encoded 

onto THz frequenc y optical carriers and multiplexed over a single fiber. Furthermore, 

negligible optical signal attenuation and eliminating high -speed electrical I/O significantly 

reduces power consumption and is immune to electromagnetic inte rference. This enables data 

acquisition and digitization off -chip, without the need for bulky backends. Recent growth of 

photonic integrated circuits (PICs) has enabled miniaturization of these optical 

communication components in an integrated platform using the same fabrication processes as 

commercial CMOS foundries 35 . A neural probe leveraging optical communication through 

PICs, could provide a breakthrough in the scaling of high -density neural probes. 

# Results 

Here, we demonstrate our novel neural electro -mechano -optic (NEMO) sensors that 

are based on the modulation of a photonic microdisk resonator with a very sensitive NEMS 

(nano -electromechanical systems) actuator. The devices can achieve sensitivities that are 

several orders of magnitude higher than the state -of -the -art photonic modulators, allowing 

them to be employed for neural recording. The photonic microdisk resonator encodes the 

detected neural signa l onto a distinct resonance wavelength, allowing potentially hundreds of 

devices to be coupled to the same bus waveguide. 

In addition, the electro -mechanical sensor exhibits an extremely high input impedance 

(~48 GΩ), well beyond the limits of state -of -the -art neural amplifiers (i.e., Intan 40 : 13 MΩ, 

ADInstruments 41 : 100 MΩ) . This decouples the effect of electrode -tissue impedance from the 

rest of the recording system, thus breaking the impedance -SNR trade -off, a longstanding 

limitation of existing neural interfaces. Therefore, this design facilitates scaling to small 

recording electrodes (with high impedances) to more effecti vely pick up single unit 

recordings, without affecting the SNR, and enabl e detection of different cell types from their 7

corresponding spike waveforms 42,43 . Furthermore, the combination of a small electrode size, 

low input capacitance of the device (measured to be ~3.3 fF) and large dynamic range 

significantly reduces the stimulation artifact from several milliseconds to well below 1 ms 

(𝜏 𝑁𝐸𝑀𝑂 = 0.073 𝑚𝑠 ). As a result, the stimulation artifact decays rapidly and will have a 

negligible overlap with the evoked response. 

Design 

To the best of our knowledge, there is no photonic sensor design reported in the literature that 

meets all the requirements for neural sensing and multiplexing. A sensor that can optically 

multiplex neural signals must have high sensitivity at low operatin g voltages with a sub -

millivolt limit of detection, low power consumption for negligible heat generation, high input 

impedance, operating bandwidth > 30 kHz, and narrow spectral linewidth to multiplex 

multiple signals. The closest designs are photonic modu lators, typically using thermo -optic or 

electro -optic transduction mechanisms, where the input voltage generates heat or an electric 

field that results in a change of refractive index. When built on a micro -disk resonator, this 

results in a change of reson ance wavelengths which isolates the signal to a narrow wavelength 

linewidth. Using this technique, multiple modulators can be simultaneously coupled to a 

single waveguide 44,45 .

These devices are typically used as high -speed electro -optic modulators or tunable 

filters rather than high sensitivity for low input voltages. However, if used as electrical neural 

sensors, each of these existing modulators have significant drawbacks. A t hermo -optic 

modulator would not be able to detect the weak electrophysiology signals. Using a resistive 

heater to convert the electrophysiology voltage into thermal energy, a thermo -optic modulator ,

with the necessary input impedance > 1 MΩ , would result in negligible thermal power from 

the neuron (𝑃 𝑡 ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑚𝑎𝑙 = 𝑉 2/𝑅 ≈ 1𝑝𝑊 ) and would not cause any detectable modulation even 

using the most sensitive thermo -optic microring resonators (~ 1nm mW -1) 36,37 . Existing 

electro -optic modulators transduce the electric field directly but typically have low 8

sensitivities on the order of ~ 1 pm V-1 or high optical losses which broadens the linewidth of 

the optical signal and limits multiplexing 38,46,47 .

Recently, NEMS monolithically fabricated with photonics have been demonstrated 

with electro -optic sensitivities that are several orders of magnitude larger (up to ~ 1000 pm V-

> 1

) . However, these devices require high operating voltages > 25 V that makes them 

vulnerable to noise and increased crosstalk, rendering them impractical for biomedical 

devices 39 . These devices also occupy large footprints or have broad linewidths that limit their 

usefulness for a multiplexed neural sensor array. 

Conceptual Design 

Figure 2 . (a) Schematic of the NEMO unit cell transduction mechanism. Neuronal activity 

generates a voltage which is applied to the fixed fingers of the comb drive. This generates an 9

attractive electrostatic force between the fixed and moving fingers that causes mechanical 

displacement of the comb drive. This mechanical displacement changes the resonance 

wavelength of the photonic disk. A laser is connected to the photonic waveguide wh ich 

couples to the resonator and then to a photodetector. The input from the laser is modulated by 

the resonance wavelength change and neural signal is recovered at the output as the 

photodetector current. (b) Multiplexing of multiple sensors using a singl e waveguide by 

encoding each sensor at a different wavelength. (c) Schematic and enlarged view of NEMO 

sensors in an implantable neural probe where the backend connection is only a few optical 

fibers. 

In this design, a NEMS actuator is first used to convert th e electrophysiology voltage 

into a mechanical displacement, where the voltage generates an electrostatic force of a 

suspended comb drive. This motion is encoded optically as the actuator moves toward the 

photonic modulator causing a shift of its resonance wavelength ( Fig ure 2a ). A bus waveguide 

supplies light from a laser source and the photonic resonator filters out its respective 

resonance wavelength. A photodetector is then used to measure the tr ansmitted light and 

reconstruct the electrophysiology signal (Fig ure 2b -c). By designing each photonic resonator 

to filter a different wavelength of light, multiple sensors can be connected using a signal bus 

waveguide in a wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) scheme. This technology would 

enable a lightweight backend, n ecessary for high density chronic recordings, where a single 

optical fiber could transmit the electrophysiology signals from multiple neural sensors, and 

just a few fibers could massively scale the number of recording channels to well beyond the 

state of the art (Fig ure 2c). 

We have successfully designed novel electro -mechano -optica l sensors that can detect 

electrical signals as small as 1 10 μV rms . By leveraging a gap closing actuator (GCA) design, 

we can scale the sensitivity of the device (> 150 pm V-1) and the operating voltage (< 5 V), 

while maintaining low power consumption (< 1 μW), sufficient bandwidth (> 60 kHz), and 10 

high quality -factor (> 30 k, narrow spectral linewidth < 50 pm). This represents a 2 order -of -

magnitude increase in sensitivity within a similar footprint for high -Q photonic NEMS 

resonators. The electro -optic transduction of the device is comprised of two components: the 

electro -mechanical sensor and the opto -mechanical transducer. 

Electro -mechanical design 

The electro -mechanical sensor has a sensitivity of  𝑆 𝑚𝑒𝑐 ℎ = 𝑑𝑥 /𝑑𝑉  (where  𝑥  is displacement 

and  𝑉  is voltage), which depends on the electrostatic force,  𝐹 𝑒 , and the equivalent stiffness of 

the device,  𝑘 𝑚 . In contrast to conventional electrostatic comb drives, where the direction of 

displacement of the moving shuttle is along the length of the fingers, in the GCA, the 

direction of displacement is normal to the length of the fingers, where the gap between f ingers 

changes. This results in an increased change in capacitance and electrostatic force compared 

to previous designs 38,40 -43. Since electrostatic forces are always attractive, we use an 

asymmetric gap arrangement to generate a larger force in the direction of actuation. 

The electrostatic force, Fe, generated by the actuator is given by: 

𝐹 𝑒  = 1

2

𝜕𝐶 

𝜕𝑥  𝑉 2 ≈ 𝑁 ℎ𝐿 𝜖 𝑜 

2 ( 1

(𝑔 1 − 𝑥 )2 − 1

(𝑔 2 + 𝑥 )2) 𝑉 2 , (1)

where  𝑁  is the number of finger pairs,  ℎ is the height of the fingers out of plane of the 

actuator,  𝐿  is the overlap length between fingers,  𝜖 𝑜  is the dielectric constant of the medium, 

𝑔 1 and  𝑔 2 are the finger gaps,  𝑥  is the deflection of the actuator, and  𝑉  is the potential 

difference between the two sets of fingers. By decreasing the gaps and width of the fingers, 

the density and electrostatic force increases. 

The moving shuttle of the comb drive is suspended using 4 parallel silicon flexures 

that can be modeled as guided cantilever beams. The stiffness ( 𝑘 𝑚 ) of such a configuration 

can be calculated as: 11 

𝑘 𝑚  = 12 𝐸𝐼 

𝐿 𝑚  

> 3

𝑤 ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑒 , 𝐼  = ℎ𝑤 3

12  (2)

𝐿 𝑚  is the effective length of the beam,  𝐸  is the elastic modulus of the material (silicon ), and  𝐼 

is the second moment of inertia of the beam cross section. The moment of inertia can be 

calculated as a function of the width ( 𝑤 ) and height ( ℎ) of the beam, as shown in Eq. (2). We 

used folded beams in our design to relieve intrinsic stress in the device layer and to reduce the 

footprint of the actuator (Figure S1 ). 

These equations can be combined using force equilibrium to obtain the voltage -

displacement relationship: 

𝑉  ≈ √ 2𝑘 𝑚 𝑥 

𝑁 𝜖 𝑜 ℎ𝐿  ( 1

(𝑔 1 − 𝑥 )2 − 1

(𝑔 2 + 𝑥 )2)

> −1

(3)

To further enhance the sensitivity of the device to detect a sub -millivolt signal, a DC bias 

voltage ( 𝑉 = 𝑉 𝑏𝑖𝑎𝑠 + 𝑉 𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑛𝑎𝑙 ) can be used to increase the sensitivity as the force is non -linear 

with voltage (1). This bias enhancement is limited by the operating range of the device which 

approaches an instability point (pull -in) where the change in electrostatic force ( 𝑘 𝑒 ) exceeds 

the mechanical stiffness ( 𝑘 𝑚 ) of the device. In this design, a mechanical stopper (the photonic 

resonator) is used to prevent the comb drive fingers from colliding and device failure at pull -

in: 

𝑘 𝑒  = 𝑑 𝐹 𝑒 

𝑑𝑥  = −𝑘 𝑚  (4)

Which occurs at a fixed displacement  𝑥 𝑝𝑖  that is only a function of the gap ratios: 

𝑥 𝑝𝑖  ≈

((𝑔 1 − 𝑥 𝑝𝑖 )(𝑔 2 + 𝑥 𝑝𝑖 )3 − (𝑔 2 + 𝑥 𝑝𝑖 )(𝑔 1 − 𝑥 𝑝𝑖 )3)

2(𝑔 1 − 𝑥 𝑝𝑖 )3 + (𝑔 2 + 𝑥 𝑝𝑖 )3 (5).

The proof -of -concept actuators were designed over a conservative area of 100 μm ×

100 μm, to match the width of a neural probe, with  𝑁  = 22 finger pairs ( 𝐿  = 10 μm × 𝑤  = 600 

nm) to maximize the sensitivity within the area constraint, asymmetric gaps ( 𝑔 1 = 500nm,  𝑔 212 

= 1000 nm) sized so that the maximum travel distance ( 𝑥 𝑝𝑖 ) would reach the radius of the 

photonic resonator where it is most sensitive, and a stiffness of ~0.5 N m-1 (𝐿 𝑚  = 30 μm × 𝑤 𝑚 

= 500 nm) to increase sensitivity and reduce the operating voltage, using a  ℎ = 220 nm 

standard photonics device layer thickness. The dimensions of the actuator were constrained to 

ensure the minimum features could be robustly fabricated and the actuator was rigid enough 

to avoid catastrophic failure during pull -in. The initial des ign was implemented in a finite 

element method (FEM) simulation to analyze the effect of fringe fields that increase the 

effective area and force generated by the actuator, and the bandwidth of the actuator which is 

limited by its mechanical resonance at ~ 60 kHz (Fig ure S1 ). The simulated electro -

mechanical response was fit to Eq. 3 which shows an electro -mechanical sensitivity 

> 150 nm V-1.

To demonstrate scalability of the device, the presented actuator was further 

miniaturized, while maintaining the same electromechanical sensitivity and operating voltage .

By minimizing and removing over -dimensioned structures, folding and resizing beams to 

increase density, and decreasing the finger gap size the area is reduced by nearly a factor of 10 

(Fig ure 3c ). Similarly, adding an additional fold and reducing the pitch between folds of the 

flexures allows the stiffness ( 𝑘 𝑚 ) to remain constant while decreasing the lateral dimension by 

a factor 2. The overall dimensions of the device are reduced to 35 μm × 40 μm, approximately 

the size of a single neuron for high density integration. 

Opto -mechanical design 

To achieve high density multiplexing, the opto -mechanical transducer was designed to 

minimize losses in the photonic resonator. We use a fixed photonic disk resonator coupled to 

a common bus waveguide. A curved silicon waveguide segment (arc) interacts with the 

photonic disk resonator to achieve modulation. Since only a small portion of the light is 

coupled into the waveguide segment, the optical loss is minimal which allows the resonator to 13 

maintain a high quality factor and the modulation mechanism is dominated by a change in 

resonance wavelength ( 𝛥 𝜆 𝑜 ) due to local effective index change  𝛿 𝑛 𝑒𝑓𝑓 :

Δ𝜆 𝑜 (𝑥 ) = 𝜆 𝑜 

2𝜋 𝑛 𝑒𝑓𝑓 ,0

∫ 𝛿 𝑛 𝑒𝑓𝑓 (𝜃 , 𝜆 , 𝑔 )

> 𝜃
> 2
> −𝜃
> 2

𝑑𝜃 , (6)

where  𝜆 𝑜  and  𝑛 𝑒𝑓𝑓 ,0 are the resonance wavelength and effective index at  𝑥  = 0,  𝜃  is the angle 

over which the arc interacts with the resonator,  𝑔 = 𝑔 0 + 𝑥 cos (𝜃 ) is the gap between the arc 

and the resonator that changes from the initial gap,  𝑔 0, due to the mechanical displacement  𝑥 ,

and  𝛿 𝑛 𝑒𝑓𝑓  is the effective index change due to resonance mode interacting with the arc as 

function of its position. This allows the mechanical sensitivity to be transduced into the 

optical domain as a change in resonance wavelength of the opto -mechanical structure. 

The refractive index change ( 𝛿 𝑛 𝑒𝑓𝑓 ) can be improved through the actuator design by 

increasing the arc interaction angle ( ~𝜃 ), reducing the initial gap ( ~1/𝑔 0) where the electric 

field intensity and sensitivity of the optical mode is highest, or increasin g the refractive index 

of the arc by introducing additional material to increase the contrast compared to the air 

cladding ( 𝑛 𝑎𝑟𝑐  ≠ 𝑛 𝑎𝑖𝑟  ). There are practical considerations in the design, including: the arc 

angle is limited by the need to connect to the bu s waveguide, reducing the initial gap or 

introducing additional materials could decrease the quality factor of the device, and 

fabrication challenges associated with small features, long suspended structures, and 

additional materials. For the initial desig n, we use a simple silicon arc with an angle of 90 -

degrees a nd 150 nm gap to maximize the quality factor and manufacturability. 

The refractive index change can also be enhanced by the photonic resonator Purcell 

factor. For a cavity with quality factor ( 𝑄 ), mode volume ( 𝑣 𝑚 ), and resonance wavelength 

(𝜆 𝑜 ), the sensitivity is increased by the Purcell factor ( 𝑓 ): 

𝑓  = 3𝑄 𝜆 𝑜 

> 3

4𝜋 2𝑣 𝑚 

, (7)14 

where the mode volume is proportional to the radius, ( 𝑣 𝑚 ≈ 2𝜋𝑅𝑡𝑏 , here  𝑡  and  𝑏  are the 

vertical and lateral extent of the electric field) such that the sensitivity of the resonator scales 

with ( 𝑓  ∝ 𝑄 /𝑅 ) 52,53 . Thus , by reducing the size of the resonator, the sensitivity can be 

enhanced. When the radius of the resonator is significantly reduced ( 𝑅  < 5 μm), bending 

losses within the resonator will increase which can degrade the  𝑄  and limit further 

enhancement 52 .

To detect this change in resonance wavelength, the resonator is coupled to a bus 

waveguide. Using coupled mode theory, the transmission function ( 𝑇 ) of the photonic 

resonator is given by the equation: 

𝑇 (𝜆 ) = |2𝑗 (𝜆 𝑜  𝜆 ⁄ − 1) + 1 𝑄 𝑜 ⁄ − 1 𝑄 𝑐 ⁄

2𝑗 (𝜆 𝑜  𝜆 ⁄ − 1) + 1 𝑄 𝑜 ⁄ + 1 𝑄 𝑐 ⁄ |

> 2

, (8)

where  𝜆 , 𝑄 𝑜 , 𝑄 𝑐  are the wavelength of operation, intrinsic quality factor of the resonator, and 

coupling quality factor between the waveguide and resonator, respectively. This results in a 

device that is sensitive to changes in resonance wavelength ( 𝜆 𝑜 ) and whose sensitivity is 

enhanced by the loaded quality factor  1/𝑄 = 1/𝑄 𝑜 + 1/𝑄 𝑐 . When the device is critically 

coupled ( 𝑄 𝑜 = 𝑄 𝑐 ), the transmission drops to zero at resonance, creating a high -extinction, 

narrow -linewidth response that can be leveraged to isolate the modulated signal. By probing 

with a laser near the resonance wavelength of the device, the change in transmission can be 

detected using a photodetector and an amplifier. A demultiplexing scheme is used to record 

the sensed signal. 

To multiplex multiple sensors on a single bus waveguide, each sensor can be tuned to 

a different resonance wavelength by varying the radius, resulting in a unique resonance 

wavelength. However, these resonances have a periodic resonance condition ( 𝑚 ) which limits 

the available linewidth to the free spectral range ( 𝐹𝑆𝑅 ), 

𝐹𝑆𝑅  ≈ 𝜆 𝑜 

> 2

2𝜋 𝑛 𝑒𝑓𝑓 𝑅  , (9)15 

where reducing the radius of the resonator increases the available linewidth. The theoretical 

bandwidth -limited multiplexing ratio ( 𝑀 ) is determined by the number of sensors that can be 

multiplexed within a single FSR using sensor linewidth ( 𝛿𝜆 = 𝜆 𝑜 /𝑄 ): 

𝑀  ≈ 𝐹𝑆𝑅 

𝛿𝜆  ≈ 𝜆 𝑜 𝑄 

2𝜋 𝑛 𝑒𝑓𝑓 𝑅  . (10 )

In practice, the multiplexing of photonic resonators is often limited by the ability to 

precisely control the resonance wavelength of the resonator based on the change in radius 

(𝛥𝑅 ). Since the FSR and wavelength change ( 𝛥𝜆 ) are both inversely proportional to the radius 

(1/𝑅 ), this multiplexing ratio is independent of radius given sufficiently high  𝑄 :

𝑀  ≈ 𝐹𝑆𝑅 

Δ𝜆  ≈ 𝜆 

2𝜋 𝑛 𝑒𝑓𝑓 Δ𝑅  , if  𝑄  > 𝑅 /Δ𝑅 . (11 )

The proof -of -concept photonic structures were designed with a two different radii of 

10 μm and 25 μm with 550nm wide bus waveguide supporting a single TE -like mode using a 

90 -degree pulley coupling configuration with a 100 to 300 nm gap to suppress spurious 

modes 54 . The perturbing arc has a width of 500 nm with an initial gap of 150 nm with a 90 -

degree angle. The design was implemented in a finite element method (FEM) simulation with 

a reduced radius to show the feasibility of the design, while achieving a reasonable 

computational speed and convergence (Fig ure S2 ). Simulations show an increase in resonance 

wavelength as the gap decreases, which is expected as the silicon arc ( 𝑛 ≈ 3.48 ) increases the 

refractive index near the resonator compared to the air cladding ( 𝑛  = 1). 

The theoretical multiplexing limit is analyzed using Equation 10 and 11. This shows 

that for a relative fabrication tolerance of 1 nm, ~ 100 channels can be transmitted over a 

single waveguide and would only require a  𝑄  of ~ 5 k. If the tolerance can be improved to 

0.1 nm, > 1000 can be multiplexed with a minimum  𝑄  of ~ 50 k, which is reasonable given 

previous demonstrations of  𝑄  > 200k for 5 μm resonators 55 . 3D finite element method 

eigenmode simulations of a 5 μm radius resonator with the arc modulator showed a  𝑄  > 300k 16 

indicating that the modulator design does not introduce significant optical losses that would 

limit the multiplexing capability. 

Considerations for Neural Recording 

Beyond achieving high sensitivity to detect small electrophysiology signals, the sensor must 

also address system -level considerations including input impedance, power consumption, and 

suppression of artifacts from electrical stimulation commonly used in ne uroscience 

experiments. Achieving a high input impedance is critical to neural amplifier performance to 

ensure that the gain of the system does not degrade due to the recording electrode impedance. 

For the NEMO sensor, the input  port  is the voltage applied  across the electrostatic actuator. 

The device forms an air gap capacitor, defined by the overlap of the interdigitated fingers. 

From finite element simulations, the capacitance (C) is < 3.3  fF, which results in a device 

limited input impedance of ~  48 GΩ at 1 kHz, several orders of magnitude larger than state -

of -the -art neural amplifiers 40,41 . For the benchtop characterization in this work , the  parasitic 

capacitance from the  probe  pads  limits the impedance to  ~0.3  GΩ, but in the  packaged device 

would enable a impedance > 28  GΩ only limited by the parastic capacitance of the recording 

electrode  (Table S1 ).

This capacitance also eliminates static power consumption of the actuator which 

consumes negligible dynamic power due to sub -nanometer actuation of device by the neural 

signal. The device power consumption is thus only limited to the optical power needed to 

detect the changes of the photonic resonance. In this work, an input power at the resonator of 

< 10 μW was needed, which was predominantly limited by losses of the optical grating 

couplers. In the simplest detection paradigm, where the laser is continuo usly set near the 

resonance wavelength to monitor the sensor, most of the power is dissipated by the photonic 

resonator (< 10 μW) which is still comparable or better than state of the art active neural 

probes 29,30 . In practice, each sensor only needs to be probed with the laser at the sampling rate 

as in a swept source configuration where the laser wavelength is continuously swept over the 17 

entire wavelength range to probe multiple sensors. This would dramatically decrease the 

power consumption of each channel to < 25 nW as the resonance wavelength is scanned 

periodically ( 𝑃 𝑐𝑜𝑛𝑠 ≈ (𝑃 𝑖𝑛 = 10 𝜇𝑊 ) × (% 𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 𝑎𝑡 𝑟𝑒𝑠𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 ≈ 𝛿𝜆 ⁄ 𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑛 𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒 =

50 𝑝𝑚 /80 𝑛𝑚 ) ≈ 25 𝑛𝑊 ). 

The small capacitance of the device also allows charges to be dissipated quickly which 

can eliminate interference of stimulation artifacts with the electrophysiological response. In 

conventional amplifiers with much larger input capacitances (~ 10 pF) and saturation of the 

small dynamic range, the stimulation artifact persists for several milliseconds which overlaps 

and distorts the evoked response. Here, the capacitance of the device is nearly 4 orders of 

magnitude smaller (even with the large probe pads f or benchtop te sting it is nearly 2 orders of 

magnitude smaller ) such that the device discharges charges rapidly with a time constant ( 𝜏  ∝

𝐶 ) that is negligible compared to state -of -the -art neural probes. 

Device Demonstration 

The devices were fabricated on standard silicon -on -insulator (SOI) photonic wafers (SOITEC) 

with a 220 nm thick device layer (Figure 3) .

Figure 3. SEM images of the fabricated device: (a) The electrical signal is applied across the 

NEMS actuator terminals which causes a change in the resonance wavelength of the 

microdisk. Light from the laser passes through the waveguide which couples to the microdisk 

resonator and then connects to a photodetector to decode the input signal. (b) Tilte d view of 

the sensor showing the waveguide and NEMS actuator suspended around the microdisk. (c) 18 

Miniaturized sensor with a footprint of 35 μm × 40 μm which is ideal for scaling into a dense 

sensor array. 

The photonic devices were characterized using a custom -built probe station and a tunable 

laser source (Santec TSL -510A) in the range of 1500 – 1600 nm. Light from the laser was 

carried over polarization maintaining optic fibers and coupled into the chip us ing angled V -

groove arrays (VGAs) with an 8° facet angle. Electrical probing of the device was performed 

using GSG probes connected to a function generator. 

Sensor Characterization 

The optical transmission spectra of the photonic devices were obtained by sweeping the 

wavelength of the tunable laser while monitoring the output of the device using an amplified 

InGaAs photodetector (Thorlabs PDA10CS2). The output voltage of the photodet ector was 

recorded using a data acquisition system (National Instruments NI PCIe -6374). Figure 4a

shows the typical transmission spectrum of a device. The overall transmission spectral shape 

is dominated by the spectral response of the grating couplers. Sh arp resonance dips , separated 

by the free spectral range of 4.3 nm , correspond to the resonance modes of the 

microresonator . The average quality factor of the fabricated photonic resonators was ~ 30,000 

for the 25 μm radius resonators and ~ 10,000 for the 10 μm resonators , limited by the 

roughness of the etched resonator sidewalls. 

Figure 4b-c shows one of these resonan ce peaks with a DC voltage applied to the 

electrostatic actuator causing a shift in the resonance wavelength . Due to the non -linearity of 

electromechanical and optomechanical transduction , the shift in resonance wavelength 

increases dramatically at higher voltages. This shift continues until the electrostatic actuator 

pushes the arc into contact with the resonator which acts as a mechanical stopper. The gaps 

between the fingers are intenti onally designed to be wider tha n the gap between the 19 

waveguide arc and the photonic disk resonator to ensure that the fingers of the actuator do not 

collapse together during the pull -in process and prevent irreversible stiction. When the applied 

voltage is reduced below the pull -in voltage, the arc of the ac tuator is released, allowing the 

modulator to resume its functionality. 

Figure 4. Optical transmission spectra of a device - (a) showing the expected FSR of ~ 4.3 nm 

and suppression of spurious modes using pulley coupling (b) resonan ce wavelength shift with 

applied DC bias for the device used in the remaining experiments, (c) miniaturized device 

showing similar sensitivity, but with a reduced Q ~ 10k due to the smaller resonator radius. 

(d) Transmission around a resonance mode, ( e) the measured overall system sensitivity 

around the mode, and ( f) input referred noise of sensor , all as a function of the bias voltage 

and wavelength de tuning .

Sensing of smaller signals is achieved by adding a DC voltage (~ 4.5 V) to bias the 

device (like biasing a transistor) near pull -in where its electro -mechanical sensitivity 

(~ 550 nm V-1) is maximized and the waveguide arc is moved close to the photonic disk. By 

sweeping the bias voltage and laser wavelength near the resonant peak, the maps in Figure 420 

were obtained. The encoded optical signal is confined to the region near the resonance peaks 

leaving the rest of the optical spectrum unchanged. 

Figure 4e shows the sensitivity of the sensor system : the ratio of the photodetector 

voltage to the small signal input voltage . As expected, t he gain increase s with increasing DC 

bias, reaching its maximum just before the actuator is pulled in. Th e gain as a function of 

wavelength follows the derivative of the Lorentzian resonance shape which is 0 at the 

resonance wavelength and maximized at the -1.25 dB bandwidth on either side of the 

resonance mode. Currently, the noise floor of the system is limi ted by the external I/O 

connections, predominately the laser, which accounts for nearly all of the 11 0 μVrms noise. 

To reduce the input -referred noise, the sensitivity of the device can be improved . The 

sensitivity is primarily limited by the quality factor of the photonic resonator. By increasing 

the quality factor of the devices to a very feasible value of 150 k (previous work has shown 

even a  𝑸  of 420 k is possible in a similar 10 μm radius resonator 55 ), the input -referred noise 

is scaled proportionally to be only 7.5 μVrms, effectively matching the capabilities of CMOS 

probes. 

These plots also show how the gain is confined around the photonic resonance within 

±100 pm (12.5 GHz ) of the optical mode. With an FSR of 4.3 nm, this translates to 86 

channels on a single waveguide. This number can be significantly increased by reducing the 

size of the resonator , thereby increasing the FSR, and by using other spectrum division 

techniques that allow the entire available range of the laser source to be utilize d. 

To verify the performance of the sensor, a 1 mV sinusoid test signal was applied to the 

device and the modulated optical signal at the photodetector was recorded to calculate the 

SNR (16dB) and input referred noise ( 110 μVrms ) (Fig ure S3a ). The bandwidth of the sensor 

is limited by the mechanical resonance of the actuator that can be seen as a small peak in the 

frequency response (Figure S3b) at ~ 60 kHz. The quality factor of the mechanical resonance 

is low (< 5) owing to air damping around the small and light structure. This reduces ringing 21 

and makes it robust to high frequency content from stimulation pulse artifacts (gain of the 

system is flat to less than ±1 dB up to 80 kHz). 

Based on these benchtop characterizations, the fabricated device can be used to detect 

sub -millivolt signals with a noise floor of 110 μVrms , which is dominated by laser noise. This 

is achieved using a low bias voltage of 4.5 V, a sensitivity of > 150 pm V-1, a bandwidth of 

60 kHz, and spectral linewidth of 50 pm using optical input power of 10 μW . Therefore, our 

fabricated NEMO sensors provide a suitable solution to record electrophysiological neural 

signals and encode them into the optical domain to address the communication bottleneck of 

existing neural probes. 

Ex -vivo electrophysiology recording with NEMO unit cell: 

To further demonstrate the ability of our sensor unit cells to record real neural signals, we 

deployed our NEMO sensors to detect electrophysiology signals in an ex -vivo model with 

mouse brain slices ( Fig ure 5). We used electrical stimulation to evoke electrophysiology 

signals that were recorded both by the NEMO sensor and also a conventional neural amplifier 

(as a reference). This stimulation -recording experimental paradigm clearly highlights the 

device dynamic range and small device capacitance that helps with suppression of the 

stimulation artifact s (Fig ure 7d). 

Figure 5. Experimental setup of the ex -vivo electrophysiology experiment. (a) Mouse b rain 

slice with stimulation and recording electrodes placed on the cortex. ( b) Schematic showing 22 

electrode placement locations . (c) Microscope image of the stimulation and recording electrode 

placement in cortical layer 5 and 2/3. (d) Stimula tion pulse .

First, we demonstrated the ability of NEMO sensor in the somatosensory cortex for 

recording neural response because it provides a well -characterized laminar structure with 

predictable anterograde connections (e.g., Layer 5 to Layer 2/3). Cortical circuits are widely 

studied in electrophysiology, making it easier to compare results with other similar 

approaches and validate the NEMO sensor’s performance. In our experiments , stimulation 

was performed in layer 5 of the somatosensory cortex using an anodic -lead ing biphasic pulse 

with 100 μs pulse width at 0.2 Hz and the evoked response was recorded in Layer 2/3 using a 

tungsten probe connected to the NEMO sensor and neural amplifier .

With a stimulation current of 400 μA, the NEMO sensor successfully recorded the 

evoked neural response, which closely matched the ground truth measurement obtained from 

the conventional neural amplifier. The recorded signals exhibited strong agreement in b oth 

response magnitude and temporal onset, confirming the sensor’s accuracy. To further refine 

the data, the trial -averaged neural response (n = 100) was processed using a 60 Hz notch filter, 

effectively removing the power line interference. This filterin g was applied to both the 

electrical recordings from the neural amplifier and the optical recordings from the NEMO 

sensor, as illustrated in Figure 6c. Due to the improved dynamic range of our NEMO sensor 

(> 50 mVpp) , the stimulation pulse is recorded without saturating the device, while the 

conventional neural amplifier recording shows significant distortion as the artifact exceeds the 

dynamic range (~ 10 mV pp ). To verify that the recorded signals were of neural origin, we 

performed a control experiment in which the polarity of the stimulation pulse was inverted 

(cathodic -leading). As expected, this resulted in an inverted stimulation artifact, while the 

extrace llular neural response retained its original polarity, fur ther confirming that the detected 

signal was not an artifact (Fig ure 6d-e). Additionally , both the recording and stimulation 23 

electrodes were re tracted from the brain slice while still submerged in the aCSF solution. As 

anticipated, only the stimulation artifact remained, with no detectable neural response. 

Figure 6. Cortex recordings: (a) Full recording of stimulation and evoked response from both 

the NEMO sensor and conventional neural amplifier. (b) Stimulation artifact recorded by the 

NEMO sensor shows a smooth RC response that follows the stimulation artifact. Th e neural 

amplifier recording (Intan) has significant distortion and non -linearities due to the small 

dynamic range of the amplifier needed to achieve large gain. (c) Recording of the neural signal 

from amplifier and NEMO shows good temporal and wa veform agreement (trial averaged, n = 

100). (d) Recordings of the stimulation artifact and (e) neural response with opposite stimulation 

polarity. The stimulation artifact becomes inverted, while the neural response polarity remains 

the same. This indicate s that the recording signal is a neural response and not an additional 

artifact of the stimulation. 

After establishing the sensor’s performance in the cortex, we extended our experiments to the 

hippocampus, which presents substantially greater experimental and physiological 

complexity.  Hippocampus is characterized by dense recurrent connectivity, prominent 

population synchrony, and strong synaptic plasticity mechanisms even in slice 24 

preparations 58,59 . Hippocampal recordings impose additional challenges, including increased 

tissue heterogeneity, signal attenuation, complex population dynamics driven by recurrent 

excitation and inhibition pathways 60,61 . The s timulation was applied to the Schaffer collateral 

layer, and the evoked response was recorded in the CA1 region, following the well -

established synaptic pathway of this circuit. Here, we chose an electrode placement where 

significant lingering stimulation artifacts were observed with the conventional neural 

amplifier recording to showcase the NEMO sensor’s ability to suppress these artifacts under 

the same conditions . The NEMO sensor’s recordings showed strong agreement with the 

electrical recordings from the neural amplifier, confirming the accuracy of both modalities 

(Fig ure 7). These results show the reliability of the NEMO sensor in accurately capturing 

hippocampal neural activity, while effectively minimizing stimulation artifacts. 

Figure 7. Hippocampus recordings: (a) Full recording of stimulation and evoked response from 

both the NEMO sensor and conventional neural amplifier. (b) Enlarged view of the stimulation 

artifact showing that the limited dynamic range of conventional neural amplifier s leads to 

saturation and distortion. (c) Enlarged view of the recorded signal where the artifact from the 

conventional amplifier overlaps with the evoked response due to the slow discharge of the 

amplifier capacitance. The NEMO sensor rapidly discharges s o that the neural response is 25 

clearly visible. (d) Recording of the stimulation artifact without evoked response. Stimulation 

artifact takes much longer to decay (τ_intan>100τ_NEMO) with neural amplifier compared to 

NEMO (recording without neural activity). (e) Recording of the neural signal from amplifier 

and NEMO shows good temporal and magnitude agreement, but the neural amplifier has 

additional features due to the stimulation artifact and noise that are too slow and large to be 

neural signals (trial averaged, n = 100). Fitting and s ubtraction of the decay of the stimulation 

artifact creates additional features not generated by the neural signal. This makes deciphering 

between neural signals and artifacts especially challenging. 

This experiment highlights a major challenge of conventional neural amplifiers in 

recording evoked neural responses , the saturation of the amplifier , caused by strong 

stimulation artifacts. Due to the relatively large input capacitance of the conventional neural 

amplifier (12 pF), electrical stimulation results in a substantial artifact as the injected current 

charges and discharges the amplifier’s input capacitance. As shown in Figure 7a-c, th is 

artifact significantly exceeds the dynamic range of the conv entional neural amplifier causing 

saturation and distortion that decays slowly and overlaps with the evoked response. A 

common approach to address this challenge is template subtraction, in which an exponentially 

decaying artifact signal is fit to the recorded signal. The fitted signal is then subtracted from 

the recorded signal to remove the artifact. However, the response of the amplifier after 

saturati on is non -linear and may not be accurately modeled by a n exponential fit. This can 

result in inaccuracies in the extracted evoked response that may be misinterpreted as 

electrophysiology signals (Fig. 7e). 

To characterize the performance of the NEMO sensor in rapidly discharging the 

stimulation artifact, a stimulation current pulse was applied near the recording electrode and 

the time constant of the stimulation artifact decay ( 𝜏  ∝ 𝐶 , where  𝐶  is capacitance of the 

electrode -amplifier system) was measured using the conventional neural amplifier and the 26 

NEMO sensor. The NEMO sensor effectively mitigates this stimulation artifact issue (Fig ure 

7d) by rapidly discharging the current ( 𝜏 𝑁𝐸𝑀𝑂  = 0.073 ms ) which is 2 orders of magnitude 

faster than the conventional neural amplifier ( 𝜏 𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑛  = 8.20 ms). This prevents amplifier 

saturation and enables accurate recording of the evoked neural response without the need for 

blanking, template subtraction, or reducing stimulation intensity —all of which can distort or 

obscure fast -occurring neural signals. S ince the same electrode interface was used in both 

recordings representing the main resistive component, the capacitance of the NEMO system 

can be estimated, using a first -order RC circuit model, as  𝐶 𝑁𝐸𝑀𝑂 ≈ 𝐶 𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑛 (𝜏 𝑁𝐸𝑀𝑂 /

𝜏 𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑛 ) ~ 100 fF (which shows reasonable agreement with the calculated parasitic 

capacitance) corresponding to an ultra -high input impedance  𝑍 𝑖𝑛 ≈ 1/(2𝜋𝑓 𝐶 𝑁𝐸𝑀𝑂 ) ~ 1 GΩ at 

1 kHz. It is important to note that this impedance is currently dominated by the parasitic 

capacitance in the benchtop testing setup and can be drastically improved to be close to the 

intrinsic device capacitance (~3.3 fF from comb drive) in a packaged device with an 

integrated recording electrode (~2 fF of parasitic capacitance). 

These results demonstrate the ability of the NEMO unit cell to record 

electrophysiology signals in the presence of stimulation artifacts. The NEMO sensor’s 

recordings exhibit strong agreement with the ground truth electrical measurements of local 

field pot entials (LFPs), confirming its accuracy in capturing neural activity. With a sufficient 

bandwidth of 60 kHz and a signal -to -noise ratio (SNR) of 16 dB at 1 mV, the sensor is highly 

sensitive and capable of detecting weaker, localized neural spikes. The sen sor also 

significantly reduces stimulation artifact decay time by 2 orders of magnitude (~ 10 ms to 

~ 0.1 ms) . Th e rapid artifact suppression ensures that the evoked neural response remains 

clearly distinguishable, even in the presence of parasitic capacitance (Fig ure 7d). This unique 

capability is particularly advantageous when paired with smaller recording electrodes, further 

enhancing its utility for high -resolution electrophysiological recording .27 

Discussion 

The demonstrated high sensitivity optomechanical neural sensor can detect and 

optical ly encode electrophysiology signal s thanks to the several orders of magnitude 

improvement of the sensitivity compared to state -of -the -art photonic NEMS devices. One key 

advantage of this device is that it is an intrinsic multiplexor, which can greatly reduce the 

number of interconnects and backend size without the need for additional circuitry. Tuning 

the resonance wavelength of the sensors with different radii, enables an array of NEMO 

sensors to be transmitted on a single waveguide and optical fiber. The main challenges of 

scaling the device into a larger array are the sensitivity (to reduce input referred noise) and 

spectral density. Both metrics are currently limited by the quality factor of the device which is 

well below theoretical and previously demonstrated resonators with  𝑄  > 420,000 even for 10 

μm radius devices 55 . Methods for improving the quality factor of photonic resonators are well 

established with standard CMOS fabrication processes to optimize line edge roughness of the 

lithography, reactive ion etching, and annealing techniques 55 -57 .

The ultra -low capacitance (~ 3 fF) interface of the sensor enables a new paradigm in 

electrophysiology recording where the long -standing limitations of electrode impedance and 

stimulation artifacts seen with conventional neural amplifiers are effectively eliminated. Even 

in the unpackag ed device where parasitic capacitances dominate, the sensor drastically 

improves charge dissipation from current stimulation by two orders of magnitude, compared 

to a conventional neural amplifier 40,41 , and distortion that co mpromises accurate recording of 

the evoked response 25,26 . The resulting input impedance can be two orders of magnitude 

higher than state of the art neural amplifiers which circumvents the requirement for stringent 

electrode impedance design and facilitates exploration of ultra -compact electrodes capable of 

cell identification 42,43 . The use of passive photonics and air -gap electrostatic actuators with no 

static power consumption provides a unique advantage for power and temperature sensitive 28 

applications, like electrophysiology recordings, compared to CMOS approaches that rely on 

active switching and amplifiers 29 -31 .

The miniaturization of the sensor into a compact footprint of ~ 35 μm × 40 μm enables 

implementation into a high -density implantable probe array. The narrow linewidth of the 

optically encoded photonic resonator is intrinsically multiplexed allowing an array of sensors 

to be transmitted over a single interconnect. This represents a paradigm shift from current 

active CMOS approaches which rely on bulky backend headstages and many interconnects for 

fanout, amplification, and multiplexing – impediments that sev erely constrain the practical 

use of multiple implantable probes. 

Materials and methods 

Device fabrication: The NEMO sensors were fabricated on SOI wafers with a 220 nm device 

silicon layer and a 2 μm buried oxide (BOX) layer. The NEMS and photonics structures were 

patterned using a 100 kV E -beam lithography system (Elionix) in CSAR AR -P6200.18 resist. 

The silicon device layer was micromachined using inductively coupled plasma reactive ion 

etching (ICP RIE, PlasmaTherm Versaline) usi ng chlorine gas and released using a low -

pressure vapor hydrofluoric acid etch. Two silicon etch steps were used - one 100 nm partial 

etch to define the grating couplers and the ridge waveguides, and a full 220 nm etch step to 

define the GCA, photonic resonator, arc modulator, and suspended waveguides. Details of the 

fabrication process flow are discussed in the Sup plementary Information. 

Electrophysiology : Coronal brain slices (thickness ~ 350 μm) from C57Bl6/J mice were 

prepared using a VT1200S vibrating blade microtome (Leica Biosystems Inc.) in ice -chilled 

artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF). The temperature of the slices was then elevated to room 

temperature for > 45 min before startin g the experiment with continuous oxygenation (95% 

O2, 5% CO2). The brain slices were placed in a custom -designed setup with a perfusion 29 

chamber containing carbonated aCSF. Baseline recordings of extracellular responses were 

conducted using a commercial neural amplifier acquired at 30 kHz sampling rate (Intan 

RHD2000A) to verify setup configuration and neural activity. A Pt/Ir concentric probe was 

used to stimulate the cortical region using biphasic pulses from a neural stimulator (Grapevine 

Scout with micro2+stim headstage, Ripple Neur o) and a monopolar tungsten electrode was 

used for recording. 30 

References 

1.  Machado, T. A., Kauvar, I. v. & Deisseroth, K. Multiregion neuronal activity: the 

forest and the trees. Nat Rev Neurosci 23 , 683 –704 (2022). 

2.  Montelisciani, L., Dijkema, E. & Olcese, U. Single -Neuron and Population Methods to 

Study the Circuit -Level Cortical Mechanisms of Multisensory Processing. in 1 –37 

(2025). doi:10.1007/978 -1-0716 -4208 -5_1. 

3.  Saito, Y., Osako, Y. & Murayama, M. Unraveling the neural code: analysis of large -

scale two -photon microscopy data. Microscopy 74 , 146 –163 (2025). 

4.  Teichert, T. et al. Volumetric mesoscopic electrophysiology: a new imaging modality 

for the nonhuman primate. J Neurophysiol 133 , 1034 –1053 (2025). 

5.  Chen, H. & Fang, Y. Recent developments in implantable neural probe technologies. 

MRS Bull 48 , 484 –494 (2023). 

6.  Perna, A., Angotzi, G. N., Berdondini, L. & Ribeiro, J. F. Advancing the interfacing 

performances of chronically implantable neural probes in the era of CMOS 

neuroelectronics. Front Neurosci 17 , (2023). 

7.  Melin, M. D. et al. Large scale, simultaneous, chronic neural recordings from multiple 

brain areas. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.12.22.572441 (2023). 

8.  Steinmetz, N. A., Zatka -Haas, P., Carandini, M. & Harris, K. D. Distributed coding of 

choice, action and engagement across the mouse brain. Nature 576 , 266 –273 (2019). 

9.  Stringer, C. et al. Spontaneous behaviors drive multidimensional, brainwide activity. 

Science (1979) 364 , (2019). 

10.  Durand, S. et al. Acute head -fixed recordings in awake mice with multiple 

Neuropixels probes. Nat Protoc 18 , 424 –457 (2023). 

11.  van Daal, R. J. J. et al. Implantation of Neuropixels probes for chronic recording of 

neuronal activity in freely behaving mice and rats. Nat Protoc 16 , 3322 –3347 (2021). 31 

12.  Ghestem, A. et al. Long -term near -continuous recording with Neuropixels probes in 

healthy and epileptic rats. J Neural Eng 20 , 046003 (2023). 

13.  Bimbard, C. et al. An adaptable, reusable, and light implant for chronic Neuropixels 

probes. Elife 13 , (2025). 

14.  Ferreira -Fernandes, E. et al. In vivo recordings in freely behaving mice using 

independent silicon probes targeting multiple brain regions. Front Neural Circuits 17 ,

(2023). 

15.  Horan, M. et al. Repix: reliable, reusable, versatile chronic Neuropixels implants using 

minimal components. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.98977.1 (2024). 

16.  Cambridge NeuroTech. Product Catalog . (2025). 

17.  Plexon. N-Form Multi -Electrode Array . (2025). 

18.  Rossetti, N., Hagler, J., Kateb, P. & Cicoira, F. Neural and electromyography PEDOT 

electrodes for invasive stimulation and recording. J Mater Chem C Mater 9, 7243 –

7263 (2021). 

19.  Malekoshoaraie, M. H. et al. Fully flexible implantable neural probes for 

electrophysiology recording and controlled neurochemical modulation. Microsyst 

Nanoeng 10 , 91 (2024). 

20.  Fan, B., Wolfrum, B. & Robinson, J. T. Impedance scaling for gold and platinum 

microelectrodes. J Neural Eng 18 , 056025 (2021). 

21.  Frampton, J. P., Hynd, M. R., Shuler, M. L. & Shain, W. Effects of Glial Cells on 

Electrode Impedance Recorded from Neural Prosthetic Devices In Vitro. Ann Biomed 

Eng 38 , 1031 –1047 (2010). 

22.  Salatino, J. W., Ludwig, K. A., Kozai, T. D. Y. & Purcell, E. K. Glial responses to 

implanted electrodes in the brain. Nat Biomed Eng 1, 862 –877 (2017). 32 

23.  Sillay, K. A. et al. Long -Term Surface Electrode Impedance Recordings Associated 

with Gliosis for a Closed -Loop Neurostimulation Device. Ann Neurosci 25 , 289 –298 

(2018). 

24.  Oldroyd, P., Gurke, J. & Malliaras, G. G. Stability of Thin Film Neuromodulation 

Electrodes under Accelerated Aging Conditions. Adv Funct Mater 33 , (2023). 

25.  Weiss, J. M., Flesher, S. N., Franklin, R., Collinger, J. L. & Gaunt, R. A. Artifact -free 

recordings in human bidirectional brain –computer interfaces. J Neural Eng 16 , 016002 

(2019). 

26.  Zhou, A., Johnson, B. C. & Muller, R. Toward true closed -loop neuromodulation: 

artifact -free recording during stimulation. Curr Opin Neurobiol 50 , 119 –127 (2018). 

27.  Chen, J. et al. Recent Trends and Future Prospects of Neural Recording Circuits and 

Systems: A Tutorial Brief. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express 

Briefs 69 , 2654 –2660 (2022). 

28.  Steinmetz, N. A., Koch, C., Harris, K. D. & Carandini, M. Challenges and 

opportunities for large -scale electrophysiology with Neuropixels probes. Curr Opin 

Neurobiol 50 , 92 –100 (2018). 

29.  Steinmetz, N. A. et al. Neuropixels 2.0: A miniaturized high -density probe for stable, 

long -term brain recordings. Science (1979) 372 , (2021). 

30.  Angotzi, G. N. et al. SiNAPS: An implantable active pixel sensor CMOS -probe for 

simultaneous large -scale neural recordings. Biosens Bioelectron 126 , 355 –364 (2019). 

31.  Raducanu, B. C. et al. Time multiplexed active neural probe with 678 parallel 

recording sites. in 2016 46th European Solid -State Device Research Conference 

(ESSDERC) 385 –388 (IEEE, 2016). doi:10.1109/ESSDERC.2016.7599667. 

32.  Guha, K. K. S. S. I. J. Micro and Nanoelectronics Devices, Circuits and Systems . vol. 

1382 (Springer Nature, Singapore, 2025). 33 

33.  Kinget, P. R. Scaling analog circuits into deep nanoscale CMOS: Obstacles and ways 

to overcome them. in 2015 IEEE Custom Integrated Circuits Conference (CICC) 1–8

(IEEE, 2015). doi:10.1109/CICC.2015.7338394. 

34.  Minkenberg, C., Krishnaswamy, R., Zilkie, A. & Nelson, D. Co‐packaged datacenter 

optics: Opportunities and challenges. IET Optoelectronics 15 , 77 –91 (2021). 

35.  Butt, M. A., Janaszek, B. & Piramidowicz, R. Lighting the way forward: The bright 

future of photonic integrated circuits. Sensors International 6, 100326 (2025). 

36.  Kim, M. et al. O-Band Silicon Ring Modulators With Highly Efficient Electro - and 

Thermo -Optic Modulation. Journal of Lightwave Technology 43 , 1328 –1334 (2025). 

37.  Atabaki, A. H., Eftekhar, A. A., Yegnanarayanan, S. & Adibi, A. Sub -100 -nanosecond 

thermal reconfiguration of silicon photonic devices. Opt Express 21 , 15706 (2013). 

38.  Edinger, P. et al. Vacuum -sealed silicon photonic MEMS tunable ring resonator with 

an independent control over coupling and phase. Opt Express 31 , 6540 (2023). 

39.  Errando -Herranz, C. et al. MEMS for Photonic Integrated Circuits. IEEE Journal of 

Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 26 , 1 –16 (2020). 

40.  RHD2000 Series Digital Electrophysiology Interface Chips . (2012). 

41.  Neuro Amp EX . (2024). 

42.  Ye, Z. et al. Ultra -high density electrodes improve detection, yield, and cell type 

identification in neuronal recordings. Preprint at 

https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.08.23.554527 (2023). 

43.  Beau, M. et al. A deep learning strategy to identify cell types across species from 

high -density extracellular recordings. Cell 188 , 2218 -2234.e22 (2025). 

44.  Tian, Y. et al. Reconfigurable Electro -optic Logic Circuits Using Microring 

Resonator -Based Optical Switch Array. IEEE Photonics J 8, 1 –8 (2016). 34 

45.  Ohno, S., Tang, R., Toprasertpong, K., Takagi, S. & Takenaka, M. Si Microring 

Resonator Crossbar Array for On -Chip Inference and Training of the Optical Neural 

Network. ACS Photonics 9, 2614 –2622 (2022). 

46.  Posadas, A. B. et al. Electro -Optic Barium Titanate Modulators on Silicon Photonics 

Platform. in 2023 IEEE Silicon Photonics Conference (SiPhotonics) 1–2 (IEEE, 

2023). doi:10.1109/SiPhotonics55903.2023.10141930. 

47.  Hsu, W. -C., Zhen, C. & Wang, A. X. Electrically Tunable High -Quality Factor Silicon 

Microring Resonator Gated by High Mobility Conductive Oxide. ACS Photonics 8,

1933 –1936 (2021). 

48.  Chu, H. M. & Hane, K. A Wide -Tuning Silicon Ring -Resonator Composed of 

Coupled Freestanding Waveguides. IEEE Photonics Technology Letters 26 , 1411 –

1413 (2014). 

49.  Ikeda, T. & Hane, K. A microelectromechanically tunable microring resonator 

composed of freestanding silicon photonic waveguide couplers. Appl Phys Lett 102 ,

(2013). 

50.  Takahashi, K., Kanamori, Y., Kokubun, Y. & Hane, K. A wavelength -selective add -

drop switch using silicon microring resonator with a submicron -comb electrostatic 

actuator. Opt Express 16 , 14421 (2008). 

51.  Sattari, H. et al. Silicon photonic microelectromechanical systems add -drop ring 

resonator in a foundry process. Journal of Optical Microsystems 2, (2022). 

52.  Liu, K., Sun, S., Majumdar, A. & Sorger, V. J. Fundamental Scaling Laws in 

Nanophotonics. Sci Rep 6, 37419 (2016). 

53.  Purcell, E. M. Spontaneous Emission Probabilities at Radio Frequencies. Physics 

Reviews 69 , 681 (1995). 35 

54.  Shah Hosseini, E., Yegnanarayanan, S., Atabaki, A. H., Soltani, M. & Adibi, A. 

Systematic design and fabrication of high -Q single -mode pulley -coupled planar silicon 

nitride microdisk resonators at visible wavelengths. Opt Express 18 , 2127 (2010). 

55.  Xiao, S., Khan, M. H., Shen, H. & Qi, M. Compact silicon microring resonators with 

ultra -low propagation loss in the C band. Opt Express 15 , 14467 (2007). 

56.  Okatani, T., Sato, Y., Imai, K., Hane, K. & Kanamori, Y. Improvement of silicon 

microdisk resonators with movable waveguides by hydrogen annealing treatment. 

Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology B, Nanotechnology and Microelectronics: 

Materials, Processing, Measurement, and Phenomena 39 , (2021). 

57.  Roberts, S., Ji, X., Cardenas, J., Corato‐Zanarella, M. & Lipson, M. Measurements 

and Modeling of Atomic‐Scale Sidewall Roughness and Losses in Integrated Photonic 

Devices. Adv Opt Mater 10 , (2022). 

58.  Andersen, Per. The Hippocampus Book . (Oxford University Press, 2007). 

59.  Traub, R. D. & Wong, R. K. S. Cellular Mechanism of Neuronal Synchronization in 

Epilepsy. Science (1979) 216 , 745 –747 (1982). 

60.  Buzs á ki, G. & Draguhn, A. Neuronal Oscillations in Cortical Networks. Science 

(1979) 304 , 1926 –1929 (2004). 

61.  Buzsáki, G., Anastassiou, C. A. & Koch, C. The origin of extracellular fields and 

currents — EEG, ECoG, LFP and spikes. Nat Rev Neurosci 13 , 407 –420 (2012). 

Acknowledgements 

The authors would like to thank Zabir Ahmed for his assistance in development of the 

photonics fabrication process and experimental setup.  This work has received funding from 

the National Science Foundation (Grant No. 2111660), National Institutes of Health (Grant 

No. 5R21EY033084 -02) (Corresponding authors: Maysamreza Chamanzar and Gianluca 36 

Piazza), and National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program (Grant No. 

DGE2140739) (Corresponding author: Andrew Cochran). Any opinions, findings, and 

conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) an d do 

not necessarily reflect the views of the funding organizations. The authors acknowledge the 

use of the Bertucci Nanotechnology Laboratory and Materials Characterization Facility at 

Carnegie Mellon University supported by grants BNL -78657879 and MCF -67 7785. 

Conflict of Interest Statement 

The authors declare no conflicts of interest.