Title: Antarctic fish cell cultures show adaptation of organelle morphology and dynamics to extreme cold

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 37

Markdown Content:
1

# Antarctic fish cell cultures show adaptation of organelle 

# morphology and dynamics to extreme cold 

Authors 

Francesca W. van Tartwijk 1,2 ,* , Anne -Pia M. Marty 2,* , Amir Rahmani 1,2 , Yuetong Jia 2, Edward 

N. Ward 1, 2, Isa Hussain 2, Lloyd S. Peck 1, Clemens F. Kaminski 2,** , Melody S. Clark 1,** 

A)iliations  

> 1

British Antarctic Survey, High Cross, Madingley Road, Cambridge, CB3 0ET, United 

Kingdom . 

> 2

Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, University of Cambridge, Philippa Fawcett Drive, Cambridge, CB3 0AS, United Kingdom.  

> *

These authors contributed equally.  

> **

Corresponding authors: cfk23@cam.ac.uk; mscl@bas.ac.uk. 

Abstract 

In the Antarctic Southern Ocean , cold -blooded animals have evolved to live at stable 

temperatures of 0±2 °C . This extremely l ow temperature a\ects their biology at every 

scale, from protein folding to development. However, how animal (sub)cellular 

organisation and dynamics are adapted to near -0 °C temperatures ha s not been studied. 

We therefore established methods to culture and fluorescently label cells from the 

Antarctic plunder fish Harpagifer antarcticus and a temperate comparator species , the 

shanny Lipophrys pholis . By ima ging these cultures live at physiological temperatures ,

we found that subcellular organisation is broadly conserved in H. antarcticus , featuring 

known membranous organelles and biomolecular condensates that remain dynamic, 

with mitochondria in H. antarcticus and L. pholis mov ing at similar speeds . However, we 

also identifi ed di\erences in organelle properties between H. antarcticus and L. pholis ,

including lysosomal enlargement and mitochondrial morphology changes . These 

di\erences may be functional ly link ed to protein misfolding and slow embryonic 

development in Antarctic species. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2

# 1 Introduction 

Temperature a\ects the behaviour of living systems , influencing key cellular processes 

such as enzyme kinetics, membrane fluidity, and macromolecular assembly 1, 2 . Cold -

blooded animals have therefore evolutionarily adapt ed their physiology to their habitat 

temperature, from the whole -body to the cellular and the molecular level. Antarctic 

marine fauna represent a unique model system to study such adaptation: they have 

evolved in relative isolation in extremely cold seas for at least 10 -15 Myr 3, with current 

temperatures in the Southern Ocean varying between -2 to 2 °C year -round 4.

Studies of these Antarctic species have demonstrated that cold-adaptive mechanisms become constrained as water nears its freezing point (<5 °C). At the whole-animal level, polar species’ growth is disproportionately slower than expected from Arrhenius-predicted temperature-dependent slowing of reactions 5. At the molecular level, protein folding and proteostatic mechanisms are imperfectly adapted 5, 6 , as evidenced by observations from the RNA to the protein degradation level 7-16 . These proteostatic challenges may limit cell proliferation rates and hence may explain the slow growth of polar animals 5, 6 . However, testing this hypothesis requires model systems of cold-adapted species that permit investigations at the subcellular level near 0 °C, and such systems are currently lacking. Cold-adapted proteostasis and subcellular organisation likely interact in two ways. Firstly, constitutively high levels of protein misfolding could profoundly a\ect cytoplasmic organisation, requiring adaptation of the organelles responsible for protein synthesis-related processes such as energy generation (mitochondria) and protein aggregate clearance (the endolysosomal and autophagic systems). Secondly, protein synthesis is spatiotemporally regulated through biomolecular condensation, atemperature-sensitive form of subcellular compartmentation, and it is unknown to what extent this can be maintained in cold-adapted cells 2. Therefore, Antarctic animal cell culture methods are needed to enable multi-scale integration of theories on cold adaptation. Here, we present a method for culturing cells from the Antarctic spiny plunderfish 

Harpagifer antarcticus , as well as from an ecologically similar temperate comparator, the shanny Lipophrys pholis . We combine this culture method with live-cell fluorescence microscopy performed near 0 °C 17 , by testing and adapting fluorescence staining protocols developed for mammalian cell culture to work for H . antarcticus and L. pholis .We report some of the first insights gained using this model system, on the adaptation of organelle structure and dynamics to extreme cold. These methods open up a range of novel research directions in cold biology, with significance for cryopreservation and the study of enzymes. Furthermore, as Antarctic marine animals cannot survive long-term at temperatures much above current summer maxima 18, 19 , this work paves the way towards understanding cellular limitations on the adaptability to global warming of this highly threatened Antarctic ecosystem. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

# 2 Results 

# 2.1 H. antarcticus explant s show robust outgrowth of cell monolayers 

To establish primary cell cultures from H. antarcticus , an explant approach was adopted. 

Compared with primary cell culture meth ods using enzymatic dissociation of cells, 

explantation circumvents challenges with low enzyme activity at low temperature and 

preserves more native cell -cell interactions and tissue architecture. Small pieces of 

tissue (~2 mm x 2 mm) were explanted from fish , placed in 8 -well glass -bottom dishes 

and allowed to adhere before medium addition; after one week, the outgrowth of cells 

was assessed (Figure 1a) . The suitability of s everal adult tissue types for cell culture was 

evaluated: k idney, liver, heart, muscle, fin, skin, ovary , and gill . Adherent cell cultures 

could only be obtained from skin , fin, and ovary (Supplementary Figure 1a ). Cultures 

could also be obtained from embryonic tissue (Supplementary Figure 2). As embryo 

availability was limited and ovarian tissue could only be obtained from female fish , skin -

and fin -derived cultures were primarily used for the method development and 

experiments reported here .

Culture methods were optimised for H. antar cticus and their suitability was then tested for L. pholis . For the substrate, coating cell culture chambers with commercially available fish-derived gelatin promoted cellular outgrowth (Supplementary Figure 1b), but no other coatings tested did so (see Methods, Fish cell culture). Gelatin was therefore used as a substrate for all cultures in this work. For the culture medium, L-15 supplemented with foetal bovine serum (FBS) and antimicrobials was chosen, as this is common for fish explant cultures 20 . Further modifications to this medium composition were tested but not incorporated: increasing medium osmolarity through addition of NaCl did not alter cell viability, which was very high at both osmolarities (Supplementary Figure 1c), and substitution of FBS with salmon serum resulted in loss of explant adherence and cell outgrowth (data not shown). Cultures were maintained at 2 °C, to maximise growth rates without causing cell stress: a temperature of 2 °C is within H. 

antar cticus ’ natural habitat temperature range 21 , and has been associated with faster growth (development) of some Antarctic species compared with 0 °C 22 . With this optimised protocol, using two pieces of tissue per well for skin and three pieces of tissue per well for fin, the fraction of wells with cell outgrowth was very high for skin, and moderate for fin (Figure 1b). For L. pholis , following the same protocol resulted in robust outgrowth (Figure 1b), facilitating comparative studies. L. pholis cultures were maintained at temperatures to which animals were acclimated prior to capture, which were 6 °C (winter) or 10 °C (spring-autumn). Following culture method optimisation, cell morphologies were characterised. For both species, fin and skin cells displayed robust outgrowth from the explant within one week, but the nature of their migration was di\erent, as visualised by fixation and staining of filamentous actin (F-actin) and nuclei (Figure 1c). For H. antarcticus , fin and skin cells migrated largely collectively: cells formed a sheet extending from the explanted tissue, with almost no single cells occurring. This mode of outgrowth was specific to well-adhered epithelial tissue, as single cells were obtained from ovarian tissue (Supplementary Figure 3). In contrast, L. pholis fin and skin cultures showed more jagged 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4outgrowth borders and a greater number of single cells or small clusters of cells. For fin and skin explants from both species (and embryo explants from H. antarcticus ,Supplementary Figure 2a), cells at the leading edge of the outgrowth were phenotypically distinct from follower cells further back in the sheet. Leading edge cells displayed a highly migratory phenotype, with large lamellipodia (Figure 1d). Similarly, single cells from L. pholis showed a migratory keratocyte morphology, also with large lamellipodia. In contrast, follower cells further back in the cell sheet displayed an epithelial morphology, with ‘pebble-like’ cell shapes and (partial) formation of apical microridges (Figure 1e), which are commonly observed for fish and other animal epithelia 23 . For both species, this explant-derived migration likely reflects a wound healing response, with collective migration of an epithelial sheet that involves a partial epithelial to mesenchymal phenotypic transition, particularly for leading edge cells 24 . This is supported by the observation that microridges were longer in native tissue than in culture (Figure 1e), as partial microridge disassembly occurs during the wound healing response 

> 23

. Overall, while a within-culture wound healing response occurs for both species, there are mechanistic di\erences, with the data suggesting that phenotypic plasticity is lower in H. antarcticus than in L. pholis (i.e., the epithelial to mesenchymal transition is less complete). This could arise from slower proteomic reprogramming due to low (successful) protein synthesis rates in H. antarcticus. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

Figure 1 Explantation of skin and fin tissue results in the outgrowth of adherent cells for both H. 

antarcticus and L. pholis . a) Schematic overview of explant procedure . Fin and fish tissue were 

immediately dissected from fish killed according to local regulations. Tissue s were immobilised using pins 

(green) on Sylgard dishes, cut into strips (magenta cut lines), then into rectangles ( cyan cuts). Two (skin) or 

three (fin) pieces of tissue were placed in each well of a culture dish pre -coated with fish -derived gelat in. 

b) The fraction of wells exhibiting successful cell outgrowth for both species and tissue types (n=111 wells 

(skin) and n=72 (fin) for H. antarcticus , n=112 wells (skin) and n=56 (fin) for L. pholis , from N=3 repeats for 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

all ). c) Explant cultures show robust collective migration at one week in culture, with stronger maintenance 

of epithelial morphology in H. antarcticus . Top images: b oundaries of explanted tissue are indicated by 

solid blue line, dashed white squares indicate zoom ed -in regions (bottom images) . (Widefield 

fluorescence images ) d) At the leading edge, cells have large lamellipodia (images recorded with structured 

illumination microscopy, SIM ). e) Follower cells have an epithelial morphology and display apical 

microridge s. However, m icroridges are longer in situ in H. antarcticus fixed native tissue. (SIM) c-e) Samples 

wer e fixed , stained with SYTO11 (cyan) and Phalloidin -Atto647N (gold) , and imaged at room temperature .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7

# 2.2 H. antarcticus cells contain large perinuclear bodies 

Following culture optimisation, we tested various fluorescent labelling methods for the 

investigat ion of organelle morphology and distribution in cold -adapted cells . We 

established labelling protocols using mRNA -based transfection (Supplementary Figure 

4) and fluorescent dyes, with the aim to image organelles by live -cell structured 

illumination microscopy (SIM) using a custom -built cold -imaging platform 17 . As signal -

to -noise ratios following transfection were insu\icient for SIM , w e visualised total cellular 

organelle content by performing lipid staining using Nile Red . Nile Red is a

solvatochromic lipophilic dye : its excitation and emission spectr a peak s are strongly 

dependent on the polarity of the fluorophore environment, shifting to shorter 

wavelengths as polarity decreases, e.g., when changing from aqueous to lipid 

environments 25, 26 . For example, highly apolar Iipid droplets are excited and emit at 

shorter wavelengths than organelles bound ed by lipid bilayers , allowing their distinction 

> 27

.

In both H. antarcticus and L. pholis cells, a range of lipid-based organelles were present, which fluoresced when excited at various excitation wavelengths (Figure 2a). As expected, lipid droplets were predominantly visible under 488 nm excitation with detection at 525/30 nm. These were more numerous for H. antarcticus but were larger in 

L. pholis , consequently covering a greater total area for L. pholis (Figure 2b). At 561 nm with detection at 600/37 nm, multiple cellular organelles became visible, including elongated mitochondria and peripheral tubular endoplasmic reticulum (ER), both indicators of good cell health. These staining patterns were broadly similar to those in a mammalian cell line suitable for SIM (COS-7, African Green Monkey embryonic kidney cells; Supplementary Figure 5a). At 640 nm excitation with detection at 676/26 nm, however, the brightest structures in fish cells were large perinuclear bodies, which were absent in COS-7 cells (Supplementary Figure 5a). These bodies existed in all cells in both species. They were also present in H. antarcticus embryonic cells (Supplementary Figure 2b), indicating they do not represent previously described age-associated lysosomal enlargement 28 . The population of these bodies was highly heterogenous in size and staining pattern, and internal structure was resolvable by SIM for larger bodies in H. 

antarcticus (Figure 2c), indicating a multivesicular nature. The total area of these bodies per cell was greater for H. antarcticus than for L. pholis (Figure 2d). Therefore, perinuclear multivesicular bodies exist in both fish species, but they are enlarged in H. antarcticus .To investigate the nature of these perinuclear bodies, further experiments were performed using H. antarcticus skin cells. To test whether the perinuclear bodies play a role in osmoregulation, cells were grown in media of two di\erent osmolarities. As perinuclear bodies were present under both conditions, their formation is not due to osmotic stress (Figure 2e). The structures were visible when stained with LysoTracker Red (Figure 2f), indicating they have a low internal pH 29 . They are therefore likely involved in the endocytic and/or autophagic pathways. A Dextran internalisation assay was consequently performed to assess whether these structures contain endocytic cargo. Cells were incubated overnight with 10k molecular weight Alexa647-tagged Dextran, a non-digestible macromolecule, then fixed for imaging. This showed Dextran was internalised into large perinuclear structures (Figure 2g). Additionally, large autofluorescent perinuclear structures were observed in the GFP channel (469/17.5 nm 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8excitation, 525/19.5 nm detection), but these did not overlap with the internalised Dextran signal. Such green autofluorescence is consistent with lysosomal storage bodies 

> 30

. Therefore, the population of perinuclear bodies likely represents multiple types of endocytic and/autophagic organelles. The largest bodies may represent autolysosomes (formed through fusion of autophagosomes with lysosomes), as these are generally larger than lysosomes 31 . Irrespectively, as perinuclear bodies are more prominent in H. 

antarcticus than L. pholis , these findings indicate cellular ‘digestion’ is less e\icient in H. 

antarcticus . This may be related to lower catalytic rates at lower temperatures or to higher loads of misfolded protein aggregates. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

Figure 2 H. antarcticus and L. pholis contain typical lipid -based organelles as well as large 

perinuclear bodies. a) Nile Red staining reveals several lipid -based compartments that fluoresce at 

diYerent emission wavelengths . In the 60 0/37 nm detection channel (where 600 nm is the central peak of 

the detection spectrum and 37 nm is the bandwidth) , t hese include I) the nucleus, II) mitochondria, III) lipid 

droplets, IV) tubular ER, and V) brightly labelled perinuclear bodies . (Example images from fin cell cultures )

b) The number of lipid droplets per cell is greater in H. antarcticus , but their total area per cell is greater in 

L. pholis . (Fin ) c) In the 676/29 nm detection channel , Nile Red mostl y stains perinuclear bodies, which are 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

diverse in size and density and show internal structure. (H. antarcticus fin ) d) The total area per cell of 

perinuclear bodies is larger for H. antarcticus than for L. pholis . (Fin) e) H. antarcticus skin cells show 

perinuclear bodies irrespective of medium osmolarity when labelled with Nile Red ( 600/37 nm emission 

channel [green ] and 676/29 nm emission channel [magenta ]). (H. antarcticus skin cell cultures derived 

from the same fish) f) Perinuclear bodies are positive for LysoTracker Red . (H. antarcticus skin cells ) g)

Fluorescently labelled 10k molecular weight Dextran accumulates in perinuclear compartments following 

overnight incubation. (H. antarcticus skin cells ) a-e) Imaged live at 2 °C (H. antarcticus ) or 10 °C (L. pholis )

using SIM . Median intensity projection of four images. f) Live cell images obtained with SIM performed at 2 

°C . g) Fixed -cell images recorded at room temperature on a widefield microscope . b,d) Data points are 

shaded by replicate. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 

# 2.3 H. antarcticus mitochondria are abundant , elongated , and motile 

To enable further correlat ion of structure and function in cold -adapted organelle biology ,

we next sought to selectively label mitochondria : Antarctic fish mitochondria have been 

studied in isolation and in fixed tissue sections 32 , enabling functional contextualisation 

of cell culture -based findings . Cells from both species were labelled using MitoTracker , a 

dye that requires mitochondrial membrane potential to enter the mitochondria l matrix 33 ,

confirming mitochondria remain polaris ed in culture (Figure 3a) .

By observation, mitochondrial abundance and morphology depended on species as well as tissue type (Figure 3a). For H. antarcticus , skin cells showed a hyperfused phenotype: mitochondria were highly elongated and/or branched, extending towards the cell periphery. Embryo cultures similarly often showed elongated mitochondria (Supplementary Figure 2c). In H. antarcticus fin cells, mitochondria were also elongated but less branched, and very abundant. In contrast, L. pholis cells showed a mostly perinuclear distribution of shorter, less abundant mitochondria. To quantify phenotypic di\erences, MitoTracker images were segmented for morphological analysis. We compared mitochondrial properties in both tissues for H. 

antarcticus and compared fin samples for interspecies comparison, given the fin cultures’ relatively similar mitochondrial morphology. We used Nellie 34 for segmentation, an algorithm which analyses geometric shapes and structures across multiple scales and enhances their contrast before segmentation without relying on image brightness. We also developed our own, brightness-based segmentation pipeline (see Methods, Image analysis). Both analysis methods performed similarly, but the extensive overlap between mitochondria prevented their individual discrimination for subsequent analysis (Supplementary Figure 6). As measures of mitochondrial morphology like eccentricity or form factor rely on accurate segmentation, mitochondrial morphology was not quantified further. Instead, we quantified total mitochondrial area as a proxy for total mitochondrial mass. Mitochondrial mass thus determined was found to be similar for H. antar cticus skin and fin (Figure 3b), and significantly greater for H. antarcticus fin compared with L. pholis fin (Figure 3c). It was known that highly active red muscle requires higher mitochondrial densities to meet energy demand at low temperature in Antarctic vertebrates: very high mitochondrial densities have previously been observed in Antarctic pectoral adductor muscle fibre 35, 36 . From our data, it appears that cold adaptation also leads to an upregulation of mitochondrial mass in fin and possibly skin epithelial cells, which have lower respiratory demands. This demonstrates that mitochondrial mass is generally upregulated in cold-adapted cells where cell activity levels are maintained. This may compensate for lower mitochondrial respiratory activity per unit of mitochondrial volume or reflect a general increased demand for ATP to compensate for low-temperature e\ects. We next quantified mitochondrial dynamics using the open-source software Mitometer 

> 37

. For extensively overlapping mitochondria, detection of displacement by Mitometer was challenging; the resulting measurements of speed therefore largely represent the motion of smaller, more isolated mitochondria (Figure 3d). For H. antarcticus ,

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 mitochondrial speed was similar in skin and fin tissues (Figure 3e). Surprisingly, mitochondrial speed was greater for H. antarcticus fin than for L. pholis fin (Figure 3f). However, while this e\ect was statistically significant, the e\ect size as measured by Cohen’s d was very small ( d<0.2), indicating the e\ect may not be physiologically significant. Therefore, our data indicate the motility of mitochondria may be highly cold-adapted, being functionally similar in both species. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint 14 

Figure 3 H. antarcticus mitochondria display hyperfusion and increased abundance without loss of 

local motility . a) H. antarcticus mitochondria show diYerences in abundance and morphology compared 

with L. pholis . ( For clarity, images have been masked to include only one cell , as for analysis .) b) Total 

mitochondria area was similar for H. antarcticus fin and skin . c) Mitochondria are significantly more 

abundant in H. antar ctic us than in L. pholis fin . d) Movement of isolated mitochondria is detected by 

Mitometer : the moving mitochondrion in the zoomed -in region i s tracked . e) Mitochondrial speed is similar 

in H. antar cticus fin and skin. f) H. antarcticus fin mitochondria show largely similar speed to L. pholis fin 

mitochondria. a,d) Samples stained with MitoTracker Orange. Imaged live at 2 °C using SIM. b,c,e,f) Dat a

points are shaded by replicate. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

# 2.4 H. antar cticus cells contain nucleic acid -based granules 

Finally, we looked to establish strategies to label membraneless compartments in our 

cell cultures . To label RNA -containing condensates, we used the SYTO Green family of 

DNA/RNA dyes in live cells . Di\erent SYTO dyes gave di\erent staining pattern s in trials 

using COS -7 cell s. Ιn subsequent experiments with fish cells , we used SYTO24 and 

SYTO12, as these most strongly labelled di\erently localised granules in COS -7 cells: 

mitochondrial DNA/RNA -containing granules (Supplementary Figure 4b) and non -

mitochondrial non -nuclear RNA granules and the nucleolus (Supplementary Figure 4c) 

respectively. SYTO24’s mitochondrial staining is expected: the dye has a net positive 

charge at neutral pH, causing accumul ation in mitochondria due to their negative -inside 

membrane potential .

For both H. antarcticus and L. pholis skin and fin, SYTO24 strongly labelled intramitochondrial puncta (Figure 4a), as was the case in H. antarcticus embryonic cells (Supplementary Figure 2d). These puncta most likely represent mitochondrial nucleoids, mitochondrial RNA processing granules and/or RNA translation hubs, which have been proposed to form through biomolecular condensation and to spatially organise mitochondrial gene expression 38 . The number of intramitochondrial puncta was lower than typically observed in mammalian cells, in our observations via staining with SYTO24 (Supplementary Figure 4b) or as reported in other studies using other labels 39, 40 . Some granules localised to mitochondrial tips and branch points, and near sites of fusion, as previously reported for mammalian cells 40 , as well as near sites of fission (Figure 4b, Supplementary Video 1). In addition, small and dim SYTO24-positive puncta were detectable outside mitochondria, which presumably represent cytoplasmic ribonucleoprotein granules (RNPs) formed by biomolecular condensation (Figure 4c). These puncta displayed directional movement consistent with active transport. These results indicate that even in extremely cold environments, animal cells still rely on DNA/RNA-based biomolecular condensation as a mechanism to organise their internal functions. However, intramitochondrial condensates likely di\er from those in mammalian cells in abundance, size distribution, and/or clustering, which could not be fully resolved by SIM. In contrast, when tested in H. antarcticus , SYTO12 strongly labelled only the previously identified perinuclear bodies (Figure 4d), not the nucleolus. As the perinuclear bodies are LysoTracker-positive, they are acidic; therefore, SYTO12 accumulation within these structures is not due to the dye’s net positive charge (c.f. SYTO24’s preferential staining of intramitochondrial granules). As for Nile Red and Lysotracker, there was inhomogeneity in SYTO12 staining within single perinuclear bodies: SYTO12 staining was brightest in regions within perinuclear bodies that were LysoTracker-depleted, indicating the SYTO12-positive regions are relatively dense, largely still undigested cargo. This result indicates perinuclear bodies contain nucleic acid-based structures, potentially RNA given SYTO12’s strong nucleolar staining in mammalian cells. This could arise through autophagy of RNA-containing structures like stress granules 41 or mitochondria, or through endocytosis of debris from other cells (Figure 4e). The former could indicate challenges in maintaining (the correct phase of) RNA-containing condensates in the cold. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

Figure 4 H. antar cticus cells contain nucleic acid -based granul es. a) Bot h H. antarcticus and L. pholis 

fin and skin cells contain intramitochondrial granules that are labelled by SYTO24. b) Example H. 

antarcticus skin cell in which granules are positioned at sites where mitochondrial remodelling takes place 

(see zoomed -in detail shown in panels I-III). c) In some cells, SYTO24 -positive puncta can be observed 

within the cytoplasm. The motile punctum shown here (white arrowheads) has an average speed of 0.08 

μm/s and a maximum frame -to -frame velocity of 0.16 μm/s . A temporally colour -coded image displaying 

the complete trajectory is shown. d) SYTO12 stains LysoTr acker -positive perinuclear bodies. (H. antarcticus 

skin cell.) e) Nucleic acids could enter autolysosomes through autophagy of stress granules or 

mitochondria, or through endocytosis of tissue debris. Colour code: membranes in purple, nucleic acids 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

in cyan, acidic internal environments in orange. a-d) Imaged live at 2 °C (H. antarcticus ) or 10 °C (L. pholis )

using SIM .

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint 18 

# 3 Discussion 

Using our cell culture method, we have presented the first super -resolution images of 

major cellular organelles in living cells derived from a n animal species adapted to 

extreme cold . Some subcellular features show remarkable levels of conservation 

compared with temperate species. Our results show that despite the very slow 

timescales of whole -animal processes such as development, cold -adapted animals 

remain dynamic at the subcellular level, at least for some processes, with surprisingly 

high speeds of mitochondrial movement. Furthermore, w e show that small nucleic -acid 

containing granules can exist at low temperature , showing conserved functionality via 

the process of phase separation .

However, by comparison with a temperate species, we also identify unique subcellular features of cold-adapted cells. We show mitochondrial hyperfusion and (auto)lysosomal enlargement, which may represent functional consequences of challenges in proteostasis 7-15 . Perinuclear body enlargement may function to degrade clusters of misfolded proteins 42 , potentially including entrapped RNA if RNA-binding proteins misfold (causing SYTO12-positive staining). Furthermore, mitochondrial hyperfusion may represent a mitigatory response to ine\icient cytosolic protein synthesis 43, 44 and/or higher levels of reactive oxygen species 45, 46 damaging proteins, by increasing mitochondrial ATP production 43 and protecting mitochondria from autophagy 47, 48 . We also demonstrate mitochondrial density is increased in non-muscle cell types. This may compensate for the physical e\ects of low temperature on molecular motion and catalysis; mitochondrial proliferation may facilitate oxygen di\usion through lipid environments 49 and reduce stochasticity a\ecting intramitochondrial reaction rates at low temperature 50, 51 . Further research is required to test these and related hypotheses. We anticipate that our method’s application will lead to further insights in cold biology across biological length scales. Experiments that are now becoming possible include protein folding rate quantification using established methods such as SunTag 52 or single molecule translation imaging 53 , single particle tracking-based characterisation of cytoplasmic biophysical parameters, dynamic localisation of proteins, quantification of cell stress using organelle morphology 54 , and measurements of cellular division and growth rates. Such experiments will enable us to explore the extent to which cell-autonomous factors as opposed to system-wide properties (e.g., circulatory ability to deliver oxygen 55 ) contribute to whole-animal slow growth rates and low upper temperature limits 5, 6 . This will inform our understanding of adaptation to extreme cold environments and the vulnerability of Antarctic species to their changing habitat. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

# 4 Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by a UKRI Cross Research Council Responsive Mode (CRCRM) 

award [MR/Z505341/1] (MSC and CFK, supporting FWvT and AR), the UK Engineering and 

Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) [G132372 (APMM), EP/L015889/1 and 

EP/H018301/1 (CFK)] , the Wellcome Trust [3 -3249/Z/16/Z and 089703/Z/09/Z] (CFK), the 

Medical Research Council (MRC) [MR/K015850/1] (CFK), Infinitus China Ltd (CFK), and 

UKRI -NERC core funding to the British Antarctic Survey ( MSC and LSP). 

The authors thank the Rothera marine team for collecting H. antarcticus and Berwyn Roberts and Laura Grange (School of Ocean Sciences, University of Bangor) for collecting 

L. pholis , and BAS Marine Aquarium Manager Samantha Kentwell for all fish husbandry. For the purpose of open access, the authors have applied a CC-BY license to any author-accepted manuscript arising from this submission. Data access statement: all images and code used to generate figures in this work will be made available upon final publication. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

# 5 Supplementary figures 

Supplementary Figure 1 Optimisation of culture protocols for H. antarcticus involved trialling 

diDerent tissue types, medium compositions, and dish coatings. a) Attempts at growing fi n, gill, gonad, 

heart , k idney, liver and muscle from H. antarcticus adult tissue types show that only skin, fi n, and ovary 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint 21 

(which can only be obtained from half the fish dissected ) are suitable for 2D cell culture compatible with 

high -resolution imaging . b) Coating with 0.1% fish -derived gelatin improves outgrowth rates for embryo 

explant cultures. Cultures were generated from two clutches of embryos in two diYerent experiments . The 

number of wells in which an explant showed cell outgrowth was quantified. Tabular d ata are presented as 

[number of wells with outgrowth]/[total number of wells]. c) Changing medium osmolarity does not alter 

cell viability. Viability was compared in L-15 at standard osmolarity (300 mOsm/L) and at osmolarity 

equivalent to that of sea water (600 mOsm/L) . Samples we re stained with nuclear dyes Hoec hst (all cells )

and DRAQ 7 (dead cells ). Data points are shaded by replicate. (Widefield. Imaged live at room temperature 

immediately after staining. )

Supplementary Figure 2 H. antarcticus embryo cell cultures show similar subcellular organisation to 

fin and skin cell cultures from adult tissue. a) H. antarcticus embryo cells display outgrowth broadly 

similar to that of skin and fin cultures. Clear leader cells with large lamellipodia are distinguishable at the 

outgrowth edge (left). Apical actin patterns are distinguishable in follower cells , though not well -formed 

microridges (right). b) Embryo cells also contain perinuclear bodies. c) Embryo cells contain branched and 

elongated mitochondria. d) Embryo cell mitochondria contain nucleic acid puncta. a) Samples were fixed 

and stained with SYTO11 (cyan) and Phalloidin -Atto647N (gold). Imaged at room temperature using SIM. b -

d) Imaged live at 2 °C using SIM. For b, a median project ion of four images is shown. For d, both 

reconstructed widefield and super -resolution images are shown. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

Supplementary Figure 3 H. antarcticus ovarian cultures largely grow as single unpolarised cells. a) 

Ovarian cells display some clustering but largely grow as single cells, with variable morphology. b) Many 

ovarian cells show limited polarisation. Samples were fixed and stained with SYTO11 (cyan) and Phalloidin -

Atto647N (gold). Imaged at room temperature using widefield (a) or SIM (b). 

Supplementary Figure 4 H. antarcticus skin cultures can be transfected using mRNA. a) The 

transfection yield is variable depending on cell confluence . b) In some cases , the labelling density reveals 

organelles and cytosolic structures. Samples are s tained with Hoechst (cyan) and transfected using GFP 

mRNA (inferno) . Arrowheads show (i) autofluorescence in the GFP channel, (ii) a transfected cell and (iii) 

example of an organelle unlabelled by cytoplasmic GFP. Scale bar is 50μm in both images .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

Supplementary Figure 5 For s elect dyes, initial stai ning trials were performed using COS -7 cell s. a) 

Nile Red staining shows lipid droplets at 488 nm excitation with detection at 525/30 nm , a range of 

organelles including ER and mitochondria at 561 nm excitation with detection at 600/37 nm , and small 

dynamic vesicles at 640 nm excitation with detection at 676/29 nm . b) SYTO24 strongly labels 

intramitochondrial nucleic acids. c) SYTO12 labels the nucleolus and what appear to be cytoplasmic RNA 

granules . a -c) Imaged live at 37 °C with CO 2 supply using SIM. For a, a median project of four images is 

shown. c is a reconstructed widefield image. 

Supplementary Figure 6 Nellie and a custom brightness -based segmentation method both perform 

accurate thresholding (minimising loss of mitochondrial area and inclusion of background), but 

imperfect segmentation of overlapping mitochondria. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

Supplementary Figure 7 An enhanced cooling collar support further stabilises imaging. a) CAD 

rendering showing the integration of the cooling collar with the objective lens and the custom support 

mounted on an Olympus IX83 microscope nosepiece . b) CAD model of the cooling -collar support, 

highlighting the upper cradle that holds the collar and the lower legs used to mount the support onto the 

nosepiece . c-d) Photograph of the assembled cooling collar mounted on the objective lens with the custom 

support in place, providing increa sed mechanical stability during imaging c) at the start of imaging and d)

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

after 3 h of operation at −13 °C , showing frost formation on the cooling collar. e) Technical drawing of the 

cooling -collar support with key dimensions and angles used for fabrication. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint 26 

# 6 Methods 

# 6.1 Animal collection and ethics statement 

All H. antarcticus used in the experimental work were collected at Rothera Research 

Station, Adelaide Island, Antarctic Peninsula (67°34′07″S, 68°07′ 30″W) by SCUBA divers 

during the austral summer. Fish were collected under a permit (BAS -S7 -2022/01 ) granted 

under Section 7 of the Antarctic Act 1994. The fish were returned to the UK and 

maintained in a recirculating flow aquarium in Cambridge , under a 12 h light /dark regime 

(water temperature 0 .0 ±1.0 °C , salinity 34 –36 PSU ). The fish were fed twice weekly to 

satiation on white fish and shelled krill ( Euphausia superba ). 

All L. pholis used in this experimental work were collected in the intertidal zone at low tide in the Menai Strait (Anglesey, Wales, UK) (53.23°N, 4.16°W) and transported to the experimental facility in Cambridge by vehicle, in cooled aquaria. The water temperature of the L. pholis stock tank was 12-15 °C, salinity was 34-36 PSU and a 12 h light/dark regime was imposed. For both species, all adult fish were killed according to Home O\ice UK schedule 1 requirements before dissections were performed, at the British Antarctic Survey, Cambridge, UK. 

# 6.2 Dissection of adult fish 

Immediately after killing of adult fish, external tissues (fin and skin) were briefly swabbed 

with 70% ethanol. Dissection was then quickly performed on a bench , with the following 

tissues being collected: fin, skin, gonad, liver, muscle, kidneys, heart, and gills . Selected 

tissues were then used for cell culture or whole -tissue imaging. All tissues not used for 

any of these purposes were immediately flash -frozen by plunging into liquid nitrogen and 

were subsequently stored at -80 °C for use in non -cell culture experiments . Fish sex, 

length, and weight were recorded. 

Following dissection, tissues to be used for cell culture were transferred immediately to ice-cold Leibovitz’s L-15 (Gibco, 21083-027) with antimicrobials and kept on ice. The antimicrobials were: PSN (Penicillin, Streptomycin, Neomycin) (Gibco, 15640-055) at standard concentration, Gentamicin (Sigma-Aldrich, G1272) at 0.05 mg/mL, and Amphotericin B (Sigma-Aldrich, A2942) at 2.5 μg/mL. Adult tissues trialled for H. 

antarcticus cell culture were fin, skin, ovary, liver, muscle, gill, heart and kidney. Embryo tissue was also trialled (see below, Fish cell culture). Only fin, skin, ovary and embryo were retained as suitable options for 2D cell culture. 

# 6.3 Fish c ell culture 

Following dissection, tissue samples were transferred to a microbiological safety 

cabinet, where they were kept on ice throughout the culture process. Tissues were first 

washed in fresh L -15 with antimicrobials, with fi n and skin being briefly scraped with a 

scalpel to remove external mucus. Tissues were then transferred to a Sylgard dish. Fin 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 and skin were pinned down and cut into small fragments of approximately 2 mm by 2 mm to 3 mm by 3 mm using dissection scissors, with forceps being used to hold any unpinned tissue strips during cutting. Following cutting into small fragments, tissues were immediately transferred to 8-well dishes (Nunc™ Lab-Tek™ II Chambered Coverglass with No. 1.5 borosilicate glass bottom; Thermo Scientific, 155409) that had been pre-coated with 0.1% fish gelatin (Sigma-Aldrich, G7041) in MilliQ (autoclaved for sterilisation) for 30 min and had then been allowed to dry. For skin, explants were placed with the animal-internal side facing down (recognisable by its paler colour) and gently pressed down with forceps to ensure they were flat. Two pieces of tissue were placed per well for skin, and three per well for fin. All explants were left in closed dishes for 30 min to allow tissue adherence without drying out. 300 μL of culture medium was then added, which consisted of L-15 medium supplemented with 10% foetal bovine serum (FBS; (Sigma-Aldrich, F9665)) and the same antimicrobials as listed previously. For ovary, tissue was cut along its longest axis and opened, releasing the oocytes. The ovary membrane was then scraped and cut into small sections of approximately 2 mm by 2 mm to 3 mm by 3 mm. These sections, along with 100 μL of any cells suspended in solution following scraping were collected and added to 0.1% fish gelatin-coated 8-well dishes. 200 μL of culture medium was then added. Cell culture of embryos was performed in a similar manner as for adult tissues. Embryos were dechorionated on ice using watchmaker’s forceps in salt water from the aquarium. They were then transferred to L-15 with antimicrobials for washing, and subsequently to a Sylgard dish (with L-15 and antimicrobials) for dissection in a microbiological safety cabinet. Embryos were cut into 2 by 2 mm to 3 by 3 mm pieces using dissection scissors, with forceps being used to hold embryos to aid this process. These embryo fragments were then transferred to gelatin-coated 8-well LabTek dishes and left to adhere as previously, followed by addition of culture medium. Tissue explants were left to grow for up to three weeks before imaging and were kept in an incubator at 2 °C ( H. antarcticus ) or 10 °C ( L. pholis ). Half of the culture medium was replaced with fresh medium twice per week, with all work being carried out on ice for H. 

antarcticus . For scoring culture success, explant outgrowth was evaluated using a brightfield microscope after one week; all explants that showed growth were considered to have been successful. As L. pholis cultures produced many loose clusters of cells, it was challenging to ascertain whether cells were derived from one of the tissue explants in a well, or from multiple. Culture success rates were therefore quantified per well rather than per explant for both species to ensure consistency. During fluorescence microscopy, only explants that showed good outgrowth free from obvious signs of cell stress such as large vacuoles or extensive cell rounding were included. For optimisation of the culture, additional reagents were tested that were not included in the final protocol. For coating of culture dishes, these were poly-L-lysine (PLL) (Sigma-Aldrich, P4707), poly-D-lysine (PDL) (Gibco, 16021412), and PLL with laminin (Roche, 11243217001). PLL and PDL coating were performed for one hour, followed by washing. Laminin was then added to PLL-coated dishes and incubated overnight, followed again by washing. For the culture medium recipe, additional trialled reagents were salmon serum (Salmonics, 015), as a substitute for FBS, and NaCl (Thermo Scientific, 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 J21618.A1), to increase osmolarity. For osmolarity adjustment trials, osmolarity was controlled by supplementing the cell culture medium with 8.276 mg/mL NaCl to make the osmolarity equivalent to that of sea water (600 mOsm/L). Final osmolarities were validated using a VAPRO 5600 vapor pressure osmometer. Media were then resterilised using a 0.2 μm membrane filter (Fisher Scientific, 15206869). 

# 6.4 Mammalian cell culture 

COS -7 cells were grown in T75 flasks (Greiner, 658175) or T25 flasks (Sarstedt, 

83.3910.002) by incubation at 37 °C in a 5% CO 2 atmosphere under controlled humidity .

Complete medium for normal cell growth consisted of 90% high -glucose Dulbecco’s 

modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) (Sigma -Aldrich, D6546 ), 10% FBS (Gibco, A5256801) ,

1% Gluta MAX (Gibco, 35050 ), and 1% Antibiotic -Antimycotic (Gibco, 15240 ). Splitting 

was performed at >80% confluency and medium was refreshed every 3 –4 days. 24 hours 

ahead of experiments, 10K cells were seeded in each chamber of an 8 -chamber glass 

well plate (I bidi , 80807 ) with 200 μL of complete medium. 

# 6.5 Sample preparation for fluorescence microscopy 

6.5.1 Fixed -tissue labelling and mounting 

To obtain images of microridges in situ for H. antarcticus native tissue , freshly dissected 

fin and skin were used. Chunks of these tissues were immediately transferred to 1.5 mL 

Eppendorf tubes with L -15 on ice following dissection. Tissues were then briefly 

transferred to petri dishes with L -15 on ice, scraped to remove mucus, and cut into 3 mm 

by 3 mm squares. They were then return ed to a 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube with L -15, on ice. 

The L-15 was then replaced with pre -chilled 4% methanol -free paraformaldehyd e (PFA) 

(Thermo Scientific, 28906) . Fixation was performed on ice for 30 min, after which 

samples were transferred to a rolling shaker at 4 °C for overnight fixation. Samples were 

subsequently washed three times with phosphate -bu\ered saline ( PBS ). To stain F -Actin, 

no further permeabilization step was performed; samples were incubated with 

Phalloidin -Atto 647 (Sigma -Aldrich , 65906 ) overnight ( approx. 50 nM final concentration ), 

then washed again three times with PBS . Tissues were then immediately prepared for 

imaging by mounting in PBS on microscope slides (Marienfeld, 0704002) using Frame -

Seal incubation chambers (Bio -Rad Laboratories) and 18x18 mm cover glass 

(Marienfeld, 0107 032) , with the external side of the tissue facing the coverglass for skin .

6.5.2 Fixed -cell labelling 

For imaging of F -actin in cells , fish cell cultures were washed once with PBS on ice (by 

replacing half the solution, avoiding the meniscus touching the sample ), then 

immediately incubated in pre -chilled 2% PFA with 7.5% (w/v) sucrose in PBS for 30 min 

on ice (2% PFA final concentration achieved by removing half of culture medium and re -

adding 4% PFA). This was followed by five washes with PBS . Samples were then 

permeabilised using 0. 5% Triton -X (Sigma -Aldrich , T8787) at room temperature ( RT ) in 

PBS for 5 min, again followed by five washes with PBS (3 quick washes, then 2 times 5 

min) . Samples were then incubated with Phalloidin -Atto 647, SYTO11, and Hoechst in 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 PBS for 30 min at RT, followed by 5 washes in PBS (3 quick washes, then 2 times 5 min). Dye product information and concentrations used are summarised in Table 1. For visualisation of Dextran internalisation, cultures were first washed twice with L-15. Dextran-Alexa647 in L-15 was then added to the cultures (see Table 1 for product information and concentration). After overnight incubation, cultures were washed seven times with L-15. They were then fixed as previously (without permeabilisation), stained with Hoechst to label nuclei, and imaged immediately. 

Table 1 Labels for fixed -cell imaging. 

Label Manufacturer and 

catalogue number 

Stock 

concentration 

Final 

concentration 

Incubation 

time 

Dextran -Alexa 

Fluor 647 (10,000 

MW )

Invitrogen, D 22914 10 mg/mL 1 mg/mL Overnight 

Hoechst Invitrogen, H3570 10 mg/mL 10 μg/mL 

(1:1000) 

30 min 

Phalloidin -

Atto647N 

Sigma -Aldrich ,

65906 

10 μ M 0.13 μΜ (1:80) 30 min 

SYTO11 Invitrogen, S7573 5 mM (1:5000) 30 min 

6.5.3 Live -cell labelling with dyes 

For labelling of live cells, fish cells were washed once with L-15 (by replacing half the 

culture medium). Then, half the medium was again replaced with L -15 containing the 

fluorescent dye or dyes. After dye incubation, washing was performed by replacing half 

the medium in the well with fresh culture medium five times. Staining protocols are 

summarised in Table 2. For experiments involving multiple labels , dyes were incubated 

simultaneously. Dye incubations were all carried out on ice and in the dark. 

For staining of mammalian cells, all medium was removed and replaced with fresh medium containing the labels of interest. Incubation was carried out within an incubator at 37 °C, 5% CO 2 and controlled humidity. Concentrations and incubation times were the same as in Table 2. 

Table 2 Labels for live -cell imaging. 

Dye Manufacturer and 

catalogue number 

Stock 

concentration 

Final 

concentration 

Incubation 

time 

DRAQ7 Biostatus, DR70250 0.3 mM 0.9 μΜ (3:1000) 15 min 

Hoechst Invitrogen, H3570 10 mg/mL 10 μg/mL 

(1:1000) 

15 min 

LysoTracker Red 

DND -99 

Invitrogen, L7528 1 mM 1 μM (1:1000) 15 min 

Nile Red Invitrogen, N1142 1 mg/mL 1 μ g/mL 

(1:1000) 

1 h 

MitoTracker Deep 

Red FM 

Invitrogen, M22426 1 mM 1 μΜ (1:1000) 15 min 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

MitoTracker 

Orange CMTMRos 

Invitrogen, M7510 1 mM 0.5 μ M (1:2000) 15 min 

SYTO12 Invitrogen, S7574 4 mM 1 μM (1:4000) 15 min 

SYTO24 Invitrogen, S7559 5 mM 1 μ M (1:5000) 15 min 

6.5.4 Transfection 

Skin cell culture sample s were washed 5 times with L -15 with out serum or antibiotics to 

remove RNAse from the culture dish. RNA lipo plexes were formed by diluting 

Lipofectamine MessengerMax (ThermoFisher , LMRNA001 ) in Opti -MEM (ThermoFisher ,

31985062) to a final concentration of 3% ( v/v) and separately diluting GFP mRNA 

(Scientific Laboratory Supplies , MRNA11 -100 ) to a final concentration of 4.5% (v/v) (250% 

of the recommend ed dosage ). Both dilutions were incubated at room temperature for 10 

minutes and then mixed at a 1: 1 ratio and left to complex at room temperature for a 

further 5 minutes. Complexes were then added to culture wells (in L -15 without 

antibiotics or serum ) at 20% of the total well volume. Cells were incubated in the dark at 

2 °C for 11 days before imaging. 

# 6.6 Fluorescence microscopy 

6.6.1 Imaging at controlled temperature 

For imaging live fish samples at sub -ambient temperatures, a custom cooling collar was 

used, as described in Marty, Ward, Lamb, van Tartwijk, Peck, Clark and Kaminski 17 . In 

brief, a Peltier -based cooling system was attached to the objective lens and t he 

temperature in the field of view was calibrated. To avoid condensation at the back 

aperture of the objective lens , it was periodically dried with nitrogen gas using a tube 

connected to a 3D -printed inlet. To improve mechanical stability and compatibility with 

the microscope body relative to the previous implementation 17 , a rigid support was 

designed for the cooling collar. This support ( Supplementary Figure 7) fits directly into the 

microscope nosepiece and enables secure coupling of the cooling collar to the objective 

lens without introducing lateral forces. This prevents any risk of the weight of the collar 

drag ging or tilt ing the objective lens (which could lead to potential degradation of the lens 

with prolonged use ).

Mammalian COS-7 cells were imaged in a microscope stage top micro-incubator (Okolab) with continuous air supply (37 °C and 5% CO 2). 

6.6.2 Widefield microscopy 

Widefield imaging was performed using a custom microscope. The microscope frame 

(IX83, Olympus) wa s equipped with a four -channel LED head (peak excitation 

wavelengths of 405 nm, 470 nm, 590 nm, and 625 nm; LED4D126, Thorlabs) and driver 

(DC4100, Thorlabs) , a set of excitation/emission filters for each channel (Table 3) , and a 

scientific complementary metal -oxide semiconductor (sCMOS) camera (Zyla 4.2, 

Andor) . The system was controlled with the software Micro -Manager 56 . Images were 

acquired with the following objective lenses: a 1.25 ×/0.04 numerical aperture (NA) air 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 objective lens (PlanApo N, Olympus), a 10×/0.25 NA air objective lens (Plan N, Olympus), a 60×/1.42 NA oil objective lens (PlanApo U, Olympus), or a 100×/1.40 NA oil objective lens (UPlanSApo, Olympus).    

> Table 3Filter sets used for widefield microscopy.

Channel Manufacturer and product 

number (s) 

Excitation 

band (nm) 

Emission 

band (nm) 

Dichroic cut -

on (nm) 

DAPI Semrock, DAPI -1160B -OFX 382 – 393 417 – 477 409 

GFP Thorlabs, TLV -UFF -GFP 469 ± 17.5 525 ± 19.5 597 

YFP Edmund Optics, 86 -833 513 – 556 570 – 613 562 

mCherry Thorlabs, TLV -U-FF -MCHC 562 ± 20 641 ± 37.5 593 

Cy3 Thorlabs, TLV -UFF -Cy3.5 565 ± 12 620 ± 26 590 

Alexa647 Semrock, FF01 -609/54, FF01 -

698/70, FF660 -Di02 

582 – 636 662 – 732 660 

6.6.3 Structured illumination microscopy (SIM) 

SIM was performed using a custom three -colo ur system built around an Olympus IX71 

microscope body , as described in Young, Ströhl and Kaminski 57 . Laser wavelengths of 

488 nm (iBEAM -SMART -488, Toptica), 561 nm (OBIS 561, Coherent), and 640 nm (MLD 

640, Cobolt) were used to excite th e fluorophores in the samples. The laser beam was 

expanded to fill the display of a ferroelectric binary Spatial Light Modulator (SLM) (SXGA -

3DM, Forth Dimension Displays) to pattern the light with a grating structure. The 

polari sation of the light was controlled with a Pockels cell (M350 -80 -01, Conoptics). A 

60×/1.2 NA water immersion objective lens ( UPLXAPO 60XW, Evident ) focused the 

structured illumination pattern onto the sample. This objective lens also collected the 

fluorescen ce emission from the sample , which , after passing through the tube lens and 

appropriate emission filters (FF01 -525/30, FF01 -60 0/37 , FF01 -676/29, all from Semrock ),

was projected onto an sCMOS camera (C11440, Hamamatsu). The maximum laser 

power density at the sample was 36.9 W/cm 2 for the 48 8 nm laser, 52 .0 W/cm 2 for the 561 

nm laser , and 26.4 W/cm 2 for the 640 nm laser . Raw images were acquired with the 

HCImage software (Hamamatsu) to record image data to disk and a custom LabView 

program (freely available upon request) to synchroni se the acquisition hardware. 

Multicolo ur images were registered by characteri sing channel displacement using a 

matrix generated with TetraSpeck beads (Life Technologies). 

# 6.7 Image analysis 

6.7.1 Nile Red images 

For each cell, a three -channel set of four images was taken at a 0 -ms interval, ensuring 

negligible sample movement between frames (excitation at 488 nm, 561 nm, and 640 

nm). A median -projection image was then made for each channel to reduce noise. Using 

the 600/37 channel (showing all organelles), individual cells were masked using the ‘Clear Outside’ function in Fiji 58 . The channels were then separated into images for 

further analysis. For analysis of the 525/30 channel (lipid droplets), the following actions were performed: binarisation through manual thresholding, a watershed step to separate 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32 near-touching particles, and particle analysis using Fiji’s ‘analyse particles’ function (with a minimum particle size of 0.01 μm 2 and the option to fill holes enabled). For each cell, this returned the number of droplets above the size threshold, their total area, and average area, as well as an area measurement for each individual droplet. For the 676/29 channel (perinuclear bodies), the same procedure was followed, but the minimum particle size was 0.1 μm 2 and a watershed step was not included (due to the internal heterogeneity in staining of vesicles). 

6.7.2 Mitochondria l morphology 

Mitochondria were segmented using Nellie 34 , an automated deep learning -based image 

analysis tool implemented as a plugin within the napari image analysis platform 59 .

Images were restricted to single cells; where mitochondria from neighbouring cells were 

present in the field of view , th os e image regions were removed prior to segmentation 

using the ‘Clear Outside’ function in Fiji 58 . The resulting images were then loaded into 

napari and analysed using the Nellie workflow. The model was applied to maximum 

intensity projected images . For each image, Nellie automatically detected individual 

mitochondrial objects and extracted morphological and intensity -based features. 

To quantify the mitochondrial network at the cellular level, we developed a custom Python script that processed Nellie's per-organelle output (features_organelles.csv) to calculate per-cell metrics. For each cell, we computed: (i) mitochondrial count (ii) total mitochondrial area; and (iii) form factor [(perimeter 2)/(4 π· surface area) ]. However, due to 

imperfect segmentation, only the mitochondrial area measurement was used in 

subsequent analysis steps. The script processed all experimental images in batch mode, 

generating both individual and combined output files. 

For mitochondrial segmentation and quantification using an automated thresholding method, we built a custom batch-processing macro implemented in Fiji/ImageJ. The same images masked to contain single cells were used as for analysis with Nellie. Firstly, the channel containing MitoTracker signal was isolated from any other channels. A background subtraction was then performed using a rolling-ball radius of 10 px (approximately 0.5 μm), reducing the background noise and artifacts from reconstructed SIM images. Automated thresholding was then applied using the Huang algorithm 60 ,which works by minimising the fuzziness of the given image. Compared to the commonly used Otsu thresholding, this method produces smoother and more stable thresholds in noisy or limited-contrast images. An optional manual thresholding step is added afterward, which can further optimise the segmentation performance if needed. After thresholding, images were computed into binary masks and further refined using morphological closing and dilation to improve the mitochondria continuity and reduce small segmentation holes. Each individual mitochondrion mask that was less than 50 px 2

(approximately 0.14 μm 2) was removed and the rest of the masks were analysed using the “Analyze Particles” function in Fiji, to exclude noise and artifacts. For each image, mitochondrial morphological parameters statistics including mitochondrion numbers, average mitochondrion area, perimeter, and form factor were automatically exported for further analysis. Total mitochondrial area per cell was the only parameter used in subsequent comparison with Nellie’s output. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

33 

6.7.3 Mitochondrial dynamics 

Single -channel t imelapses of mitochondria in live cells (acquired at 3 -s intervals) were 

pre -processed using the ‘Enhance Contrast > Normalize > Process all n slices > use stack 

histogram ’ function in Fiji. Normalised stacks were then uploaded into the Mitometer 

application in MATLAB. Custom ‘Advanced settings ’ were used, namely a Custom gauss 

filt er sigma set to 15 and a Custom threshold set to 10. Processed images were 

individually assessed for quality. All the tracks not corresponding to a mitochondrion 

were removed and only tracks confident ly assessed as accurate with a track length of 2 

or higher were retained and exported for analysis. 

# 6.8 Statistical analyses 

Each comparative analysis between species and/or tissue type s included at least two 

biological replicates. A single biological replicate included all data derived from the same 

individual fish , from multiple technical replicates (distinct explant cultures ). Specific 

tests used for each analysis are given below with relevant justification .

For all analyses of images of Nile Red-stained cells (both 525/30 and 676/29 emission channels) and all comparisons in Figure 2, statistical comparisons between H. 

antarcticus and L. pholis were performed using Mann-Whitney test, with significance set at p<0.05. E\ect sizes were reported as Cohen’s d. Normality was assessed using the Shapiro-Wilk test and variances were evaluated using Levene’s test. All data were non-normally distributed except for H. antarcticus perinuclear body area and variance was unequal for all comparisons between H. antarcticus and L. pholis .For mitochondrial morphology and mitochondrial dynamic analyses, all statistical comparisons between species and between tissue types were performed using Mann-Whitney U test, with significance set at p<0.05. Non-parametric testing was selected following assessment of normality and equality of variances. E\ect sizes were reported as Cohen’s d.All statistical analyses were performed in Python (SciPy library). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

34 

# 7 References 

1. Knapp, B.D. & Huang, K.C. The effects of temperature on cellular physiology. Annual Review of Biophysics 51 , 499-526 (2022). 2. van Tartwijk, F.W. & Kaminski, C.F. Protein condensaOon, cellular organizaOon, and spaOotemporal regulaOon of cytoplasmic properOes. Advanced Biology 6, 2101328 (2022). 3. Clarke, A. & Crame, J.A. The Southern Ocean benthic fauna and climate change: a historical perspecOve. Philosophical Transac9ons of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 338 , 299-309 (1992). 4. Peck, L.S., Convey, P. & Barnes, D.K. Environmental constraints on life histories in AntarcOc ecosystems: tempos, Omings and predictability. Biol Rev Camb Philos Soc 81 ,75-109 (2006). 5. Peck, L.S. A cold limit to adaptaOon in the sea. Trends in Ecology & Evolu9on 31 , 13-26 (2016). 6. Peck, L.S. AntarcOc marine biodiversity: adaptaOons, environments and responses to change. Oceanography and Marine Biology (2018). 7. Fraser, K.P., Clarke, A. & Peck, L.S. Low-temperature protein metabolism: seasonal changes in protein synthesis and RNA dynamics in the AntarcOc limpet Nacella concinna Strebel 1908. J Exp Biol 205 , 3077-3086 (2002). 8. Fraser, K.P.P., Clarke, A. & Peck, L.S. Growth in the slow lane: protein metabolism in the AntarcOc limpet Nacella concinna (Strebel 1908). Journal of Experimental Biology 210 ,2691-2699 (2007). 9. Fraser, K.P.P., Peck, L.S., Clark, M.S. & Clarke, A. A comparaOve study of Ossue protein synthesis rates in an AntarcOc, Harpagifer antarcOcus and a temperate, Lipophrys pholis teleost. Compara9ve Biochemistry and Physiology Part A: Molecular &Integra9ve Physiology 295 , 111650 (2024). 10. Fraser, K.P.P., Peck, L.S., Clark, M.S., Clarke, A. & Hill, S.L. Life in the freezer: protein metabolism in AntarcOc fish. Royal Society Open Science 9, 211272 (2022). 11. Todgham, A.E., Hoaglund, E.A. & Hofmann, G.E. Is cold the new hot? Elevated ubiquiOn-conjugated protein levels in Ossues of AntarcOc fish as evidence for cold-denaturaOon of proteins in vivo. Journal of Compara9ve Physiology B 177 , 857-866 (2007). 12. Shin, S.C. et al. Transcriptomics and comparaOve analysis of three antarcOc notothenioid fishes. PLoS One 7, e43762 (2012). 13. Hofmann, G.E., Lund, S.G., Place, S.P. & Whitmer, A.C. Some like it hot, some like it cold: the heat shock response is found in New Zealand but not AntarcOc notothenioid fishes. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology 316 , 79-89 (2005). 14. Place, S.P. & Hofmann, G.E. ConsOtuOve expression of a stress-inducible heat shock protein gene, hsp70, in phylogeneOcally distant AntarcOc fish. Polar Biology 28 , 261-267 (2005). 15. Clark, M.S., Fraser, K.P.P., Burns, G. & Peck, L.S. The HSP70 heat shock response in the AntarcOc fish Harpagifer antarcOcus. Polar Biology 31 , 171-180 (2008). 16. Berthelot, C. et al. AdaptaOon of proteins to the cold in AntarcOc fish: a role for methionine? Genome Biology and Evolu9on 11 , 220-231 (2018). 17. Marty, A.-P.M. et al. A high-resoluOon microscopy system for biological studies of cold-adapted species under physiological condiOons. Small Methods 9, 2401682 (2025). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

35 

18. Peck, L.S., Clark, M.S., Morley, S.A., Massey, A. & Rossef, H. Animal temperature limits and ecological relevance: effects of size, acOvity and rates of change. Func9onal Ecology 23 , 248-256 (2009). 19. Clark, M.S. et al. Lack of long-term acclimaOon in AntarcOc encrusOng species suggests vulnerability to warming. Nature Communica9ons 10 , 3383 (2019). 20. LeClair, E.E. The last half century of fish explant and organ culture. Zebrafish 18 , 1-19 (2021). 21. Bilyk, K.T. & DeVries, A.L. Heat tolerance and its plasOcity in AntarcOc fishes. 

Compara9ve Biochemistry and Physiology Part A: Molecular & Integra9ve Physiology 

158 , 382-390 (2011). 22. Stanwell-Smith, D. & Peck, L.S. Temperature and embryonic development in relaOon to spawning and field occurrence of larvae of three AntarcOc echinoderms. The Biological Bulle9n 194 , 44-52 (1998). 23. Depasquale, J.A. AcOn microridges. The Anatomical Record 301 , 2037-2050 (2018). 24. Campbell, K. & Casanova, J. A common framework for EMT and collecOve cell migraOon. Development 143 , 4291-4300 (2016). 25. Greenspan, P., Mayer, E.P. & Fowler, S.D. Nile red: a selecOve fluorescent stain for intracellular lipid droplets. J Cell Biol 100 , 965-973 (1985). 26. Duia, A.K., Kamada, K. & Ohta, K. Spectroscopic studies of nile red in organic solvents and polymers. Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology A: Chemistry 93 , 57-64 (1996). 27. Zhanghao, K. et al. High-dimensional super-resoluOon imaging reveals heterogeneity and dynamics of subcellular lipid membranes. Nature Communica9ons 11 , 5890 (2020). 28. Liu, H., Tang, H. & Pang, S. Role of lysosomal morphology in aging and age-related diseases. Ageing Research Reviews 115 , 103033 (2026). 29. Chazoie, B. Labeling lysosomes in live cells with LysoTracker. Cold Spring Harbor Protocols 2011 , pdb. prot5571 (2011). 30. Katz, M.L. & Robison, W.G. What is lipofuscin? Defining characterisOcs and differenOaOon from other autofluorescent lysosomal storage bodies. Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics 34 , 169-184 (2002). 31. Klumperman, J. & Raposo, G. The complex ultrastructure of the endolysosomal system. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 6, a016857 (2014). 32. Guderley, H.E. & Pierre, J.S. in Animals and Temperature: Phenotypic and EvoluOonary AdaptaOon. (eds. I.A. Johnston & A.F. Bennei) 127-152 (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge; 1996). 33. Neikirk, K. et al. MitoTracker: a useful tool in need of beier alternaOves. European Journal of Cell Biology 102 , 151371 (2023). 34. Lefebvre, A.E.Y.T. et al. Nellie: automated organelle segmentaOon, tracking and hierarchical feature extracOon in 2D/3D live-cell microscopy. Nature Methods 22 , 751-763 (2025). 35. Walesby, N.J. & Johnston, I.A. Fibre types in the locomotory muscles of an AntarcOc teleost, Notothenia rossii: A histochemical ultrastructural and biochemical study. Cell and 9ssue research 208 , 143-164 (1980). 36. Johnston, I.A., Calvo, J., Guderley, H., Fernandez, D. & Palmer, L. LaOtudinal variaOon in the abundance and oxidaOve capaciOes of muscle mitochondria in perciform fishes. 

Journal of Experimental Biology 201 , 1-12 (1998). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

36 

37. Lefebvre, A., Ma, D., Kessenbrock, K., Lawson, D.A. & Digman, M.A. Automated segmentaOon and tracking of mitochondria in live-cell Ome-lapse images. Nat Methods 18 , 1091-1102 (2021). 38. Begeman, A., Smolka, J.A., Shami, A., Waingankar, T.P. & Lewis, S.C. SpaOal analysis of mitochondrial gene expression reveals dynamic translaOon hubs and remodeling in stress. Science Advances 11 , eads6830 (2025). 39. Stephan, T., Roesch, A., Riedel, D. & Jakobs, S. Live-cell STED nanoscopy of mitochondrial cristae. Scien9fic Reports 9, 12419 (2019). 40. Ren, W. et al. VisualizaOon of cristae and mtDNA interacOons via STED nanoscopy using a low saturaOon power probe. Light: Science & Applica9ons 13 , 116 (2024). 41. Houghton, O.H., Mizielinska, S. & Gomez-Suaga, P. The interplay between autophagy and RNA homeostasis: implicaOons for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal demenOa. Fron9ers in Cell and Developmental Biology Volume 10 -2022 (2022). 42. Wang, D.W., Peng, Z.J., Ren, G.F. & Wang, G.X. The different roles of selecOve autophagic protein degradaOon in mammalian cells. Oncotarget 6, 37098-37116 (2015). 43. Tondera, D. et al. SLP-2 is required for stress-induced mitochondrial hyperfusion. 

EMBO Journal 28 , 1589-1600 (2009). 44. Liu, Y.J., McIntyre, R.L., Janssens, G.E. & Houtkooper, R.H. Mitochondrial fission and fusion: a dynamic role in aging and potenOal target for age-related disease. 

Mechanisms of Ageing and Development 186 , 111212 (2020). 45. Ježek, J., Cooper, K.F. & Strich, R. ReacOve oxygen species and mitochondrial dynamics: the Yin and Yang of mitochondrial dysfuncOon and cancer progression. An9oxidants (Basel) 7 (2018). 46. Xu, X., Pang, Y. & Fan, X. Mitochondria in oxidaOve stress, inflammaOon and aging: from mechanisms to therapeuOc advances. Signal Transduc9on and Targeted Therapy 10 ,190 (2025). 47. Gomes, L.C., Benedeio, G.D. & Scorrano, L. During autophagy mitochondria elongate, are spared from degradaOon and sustain cell viability. Nature Cell Biology 13 , 589-598 (2011). 48. Rambold, A.S., Kostelecky, B., Elia, N. & Lippincoi-Schwartz, J. Tubular network formaOon protects mitochondria from autophagosomal degradaOon during nutrient starvaOon. Proceedings of the Na9onal Academy of Sciences 108 , 10190-10195 (2011). 49. Sidell, B.D. Intracellular oxygen diffusion: the roles of myoglobin and lipid at cold body temperature. Journal of Experimental Biology 201 , 1119-1128 (1998). 50. Czarnoleski, M. & Verberk, W.C.E.P. Cell size maiers: a unifying theory across the tree of life. Trends in Ecology & Evolu9on (2025). 51. Verberk, W. et al. Shrinking body sizes in response to warming: explanaOons for the temperature-size rule with special emphasis on the role of oxygen. Biol Rev Camb Philos Soc 96 , 247-268 (2021). 52. Pichon, X. et al. VisualizaOon of single endogenous polysomes reveals the dynamics of translaOon in live human cells. The Journal of Cell Biology (2016). 53. Ströhl, F. et al. Single molecule translaOon imaging visualizes the dynamics of local β-acOn synthesis in reOnal axons. Scien9fic Reports 7, 709 (2017). 54. Lu, M. et al. ERnet: a tool for the semanOc segmentaOon and quanOtaOve analysis of endoplasmic reOculum topology. Nature Methods 20 , 569-579 (2023). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 27, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.24.720652 doi: bioRxiv preprint

37 

55. Pörtner, H.-O., Bock, C. & Mark, F.C. Oxygen- and capacity-limited thermal tolerance: bridging ecology and physiology. Journal of Experimental Biology 220 , 2685-2696 (2017). 56. Edelstein, A., Amodaj, N., Hoover, K., Vale, R. & Stuurman, N. Computer control of microscopes using μManager. Curr Protoc Mol Biol Chapter 14 , Unit14.20 (2010). 57. Young, L.J., Ströhl, F. & Kaminski, C.F. A guide to structured illuminaOon TIRF microscopy at high speed with mulOple colors. JoVE , e53988 (2016). 58. Schindelin, J. et al. Fiji: an open-source plasorm for biological-image analysis. Nature Methods 9, 676-682 (2012). 59. Selzer, G.J. et al. napari-imagej: ImageJ ecosystem access from napari. Nature Methods 

20 , 1443-1444 (2023). 60. Huang, L.-K. & Wang, M.-J.J. Image thresholding by minimizing the measures of fuzziness. PaRern recogni9on 28 , 41-51 (1995).