Title: Interactions between hippocampus and visceral organs in sleep and wakefulness

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 70

Markdown Content:
1

Interactions between hippocampus and visceral organs in sleep and wakefulness 

Abbreviated title: 

Gut -hippocampus interaction: sleep and wake states 

Ekaterina Levichkina 1,2 , Ivan N. Pigarev 2,+ , Trichur R. Vidyasagar 1,3 

1 Department of Optometry and Vision Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, 3010, 

Australia 

2 Institute for Information Transmission Problems (Kharkevich Institute), Russian Academy of 

Sciences, Moscow, 127051, Russia. 

3 Florey Department of Neuroscience & Mental Health, University of Melbourne, Parkville, 3010, 

Australia. 

+ Deceased. 

Correspondence should be addressed to Trichur Vidyasagar (trv@unimelb.edu.au) 

Conflict of interest statement 

The authors declare no competing financial interests. 

Acknowledgments 

This project was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research Grants and the National 

Health and Medical Research Council (Project No2027651). Ivan Pigarev is gratefully 

acknowledged by the other authors for his original contribution with concept ualization, collection 

of data and discussion of the results prior to his unfortunate death on 15 July 2021. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2

Abstract 

Exteroception is attenuated during sleep, while interoceptive signals may remain active. If so, 

they can trigger responses in their target areas, including the hippocampus, which is know n to 

receive information from the internal organs and is susceptible to oversynchronization while 

triggered . We investigated whether the hippocampus is synchronized to various visceral events in 

sleep and wakefulness. 

Activity of hippocampal neurons and local field potentials (LFPs) was co -registered with 

respiration, heart rate and myoelectric signals of the stomach and duodenum in two adult female 

cats over multiple sleep –wake cycles. Visceral event -triggered and neuronal spike -triggered 

(bootstrapping -based) analyses were performed in wakefulness and SWS. 

Synchronization between visceral and hippocampal activities occurred in both wakefulness and 

SWS. However, hippocampal cells and LFPs showed preferences for one state only. Consistent with 

prior studies, we found the strongest link between high -amplitude r espiratory events and 

hippocampal activity, with significantly higher occurrence during SWS. Both stomach and duodenal 

signals were also represented in hippocampal activity. Motility -associated duodenal myoelectric 

signals correlated with hippocampal activ ity more during wakefulness where gastrointestinal 

motility is more active, while synchronization between regular duodenal waves and the 

hippocampus was more frequent during SWS. 

We conclude that the interoceptive signals reach the hippocampus in both sleep and wakefulness 

and suggest that they have the potential to oversynchronize any ongoing synchronized slow -wave 

activities in the hippocampal network during slow wave sleep ( SWS ).

Significance Statement 

What types of sensory input shapes hippocampal activity and regulates its rhythmical 

structure is important for understanding both normal and paroxysmal hippocampal dynamics . We 

find that synchronization between interoceptive signals and hippocampal neural activity exists 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

during wakefulness and is preserved during SWS . Moreover, in some cases, this association 

increases in SWS for respiratory and periodic duodenal activities. Our data revealed specificity of 

hippocampal neurons to both type of visceral activity and state of vigilance , suggesting that 

hippocampal network is shaped by visceral activity in a state -dependent manner. Our results 

highlight the factors underlying the comorbidities of epilepsy with gastrointestinal, cardiac or 

respiratory disorders. 

Introduction 

Hippocampal activity is known to be strongly influenced by the context of concurrently 

occurring events (Vidyasagar et al., 1991; Kubie and Muller, 1991; Salzman n et al., 1993; Kennedy 

and Shapiro, 2009; Preston et al., 2013; Azevedo et al., 2019). This is related to various aspects of 

the external environment, such as odours or visual cues or to internal signals reflecting an animal's 

emotional state or current ne eds. The hippocampus is ideally placed for assessing emotional states 

and modulating internal goals due to its connections to brain structures involved in visceral or 

emotional control. These include hypothalamic zones associated with feeding, reproduction and 

defence mechanisms, the insular cortex crucial for viscerosensory and visceromotor functions, the 

infralimbic and prelimbic cortices and the amygdala (Kishi et al., 2000; Petrovich et al., 2001; 

Castle et al., 2005; Herman et al., 2005; Dong and Swans on, 2006; Fanselow and Dong, 201 0). 

Hippocampal neurons respond to interoceptive signals related to breathing and heart rate 

(Frysinger and Harper, 1988). Synchronization of hippocampal activity with breathing has been 

reported in various species (Duffin and Hockman, 1972; Frysinger et al., 1989; Radna and 

MacLean, 1981; Poe et al., 1996; Herrero et al., 2018; Folschweiller and Sauer, 2021; Nokia and 

Penttonen, 2022). However, much less is known about the hippocampal role in analysing 

interoceptive information from other modalities. Given the hippocampus’s connections to diverse 

brain regions involved in visceral processing, such relationships warrant investigation. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

The context -dependency of hippocampal activity is typically discussed for awake behaviour and 

exteroceptive signals, well documented in macaques across routine situations (Vidyasagar et al., 

1991; Salzman et al., 1993). However, signals related to visceral activity are also available to the 

brain , especially during sleep, since certain visceral processes are specifically associated with sleep 

(e.g., Moore, 1991; Besedovsky et al., 2012; Ali et al., 2013). Emerging evidence suggests that the 

brain may be more receptive to internal signals during sle ep when behavioural distractions and 

inhibitory sympathetic signals are attenuated (Pigarev, 1994; Pigarev et al., 2013; Rembado et al., 

2021; Levichkina et al., 2021, 2022). 

Across species, from Drosophila to humans, satiety has been linked to sleep (Borbély, 1977; Orr 

et al., 1997; Bazar, Yun, and Lee, 2004; Murphy et al., 2016). Postprandial sleepiness has been 

shown in rodent studies to result from the production of cholecystokinin and other gastrointest inal 

peptides in the digestive tract (Shemyakin and Kapás, 2001; Kim and Lee, 2009). Recent studies 

demonstrated marked synchronization between stomach and brain activities during resting state, 

involving multiple brain areas including the limbic system (Cao et al., 2022; Rebollo et al., 2018). 

This suggests that certain digestive processes predominantly occur during rest, with interoceptive 

signals reaching their brain targets mainly in this state (Levichkina et al., 2021). 

The hippocampus is known to be highly susceptible to seizures, including those provoked by 

external and internal events (Okudan et al., 2018; Girges et al., 2020; Hanif and Musick, 2021; 

Strzelecka et al., 2022). Considering that multiple types of epileptiform activity occur more 

frequently during SWS or drowsiness compared to wakefulness (Shouse et al., 1996; Herman et al., 

2001; Dinner, 2002; Combi et al., 2004; Pavlova et al., 2004; Hofstra and de Weerd, 2009; 

Chokroverty and Nob ili, 2017; Garg et al., 2022) and are enhanced during SWS in mesial temporal 

epilepsy (Nazer and Dickson, 2009) , it seems essential to study the causes of synchronization of 

hippocampal activity across the sleep -wake cycle . If uninhibited or amplified interoceptive signals 

are transmitted to the hippocampus during sleep, they may act as triggers for oversynchronization 

(Levichkina et al., 2025). Although the hippocampus receives visceral signals in wakefulness, they 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

may have an enhanced potential to ove rsynchronize hippocampal network s during SWS due to the 

potentially higher degree of brain synchronization within the hippocampus during SWS. 

We investigated whether activity of hippocampal cells and local field potentials synchronized 

with various visceral events and whether they do so differently between sleep and wakefulness. 

Materials and Methods 

EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN 

The Russian foundations distributing scientific funding conduct an ethics evaluation of every 

research proposal prior to making a decision regarding financial support for a particular study. This 

evaluation is performed by the Council of Reviewers. Upon re ceiving funding support from the 

Russian Foundation for Basic Research (RFBR), an ethical assessment of the presented research 

was conducted also by the Institutional Scientific Councils of IITP Russian Academy of Sciences, 

guided by the Ethical Principles for the Maintenance and Use of Animals in Neuroscience Research 

(Zimmermann, 1987). 

The experiments were conducted on two adult female cats, with neuronal activity in the 

hippocampus recorded via painless head fixation using a halo implant (for details of the method, see 

Pigarev et al., 2009; Levichkina et al., 2021). Recordings were perf ormed across several natural 

sleep -wake cycles, with each session lasting up to four hours per day. 

Several parameters reflecting visceral activity were co -registered with hippocampal activity. 

Besides electrocardiogram (ECG), breathing rate (BR), myoelectric intestinal activity and 

myoelectric gastric activity, electroencephalogram (EEG) recordings and eye movement data were 

collected to assist in identifying the state of vigilance. Figure 1 schematically illustrates the 

recorded parameters. Panel A depicts the approach to hippocampal activity registration, panel B 

shows the co -registered signals, and p anel C provides a 30 -second example of the recorded data. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

Figure 1. Data acquisition and types of recorded signals. 

A.  Approach for recording brain activity: bipolar electrode consisting of 2 etched and 

varnished tungsten wires, introduced into the dorsal hippocampus with the help of a conical 

guide tube. 

.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint 7

B.  Schematic representation of the sources of recorded signals. Modified from: Amsel, Sheri. 

"Cat Anatomy (Thoracic and Abdominal Organs)" Exploring Nature Educational Resource 

©2005 -2024. March 25, 2024< http://www.exploringnature.org/db/view/Cat -Anatomy -

Tho racic -and -Abdominal -Organs > 

C.  30 -seconds long example of all co -recorded activities and markers of periodic events. 

Markers are shown above their corresponding signals: air flow markers (open blue dots), 

heart beats (filled red dots), and 2 duodenal myoelectric signals (Duod) recorded from 2 

different parts of the duodenal wall (diamonds). Open diamonds signify SW periods, and 

filled diamonds show SB periods. One can see that different parts of duodenum are only 

partially synchronized. The episode of data shows an interval of slow wave sleep at the 

beginning (note high EEG amplitude in grey) with nearly absent stomach activity, followed 

by stomach contraction accompanied by several events: decreased SWS in the EEG, brief 

eye movement (black), heart rate modulation (red) and firing of som e hippocampal cells 

(violet). 

The animals were habituated to the laboratory environment through a process commonly 

referred to as "shaping," which lasted 2 to 3 weeks and was based on positive reinforcement. During 

this time, the animals were fed in the lab space, including on top of th e recording table, and were 

allowed to freely explore the laboratory space for at least two hours per day. Once shaping was 

successfully completed, the cats underwent MRI scanning, using a 1.5 Tesla magnet. Such pre -

surgical MRI is essential for identifying individual stereotaxic coordinates for electrode placement 

in chronic experiments, where histological verification of each electrode track is not feasible. The 

technique for MRI -based ve rification of stereotaxic coordinates in cats was described in detail by 

Levichkina et al. (2021). 

The surgery was conducted in two stages. The first surgical procedure involved attaching a 

"halo" head frame to the skull, placing EEG electrodes and creating small craniotomies over the two 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

hippocampi and a guiding conical tube inserted above the dura for later electrode placements. In the 

second procedure, recording electrodes for registering myoelectric activity from the duodenal and 

gastric walls were implanted through the guide tubes. See Pigarev et al . (2009) for details of this 

technique. 

All surgeries were performed under general anaesthesia. Xylazine (0.5 mg/kg, IM) was 

administered as premedication and for analgesia. Anaesthesia was induced and maintained with 

Zoletil, beginning with an initial injection of 6 mg/kg. Additional 5 mg doses were given as needed 

to sustain surgical levels of anaesthesia, using changes in respiration and heart rates to administer 

the top -ups to prevent paw withdrawal reflex. For the two cats used in this study, the frequency of 

the additional doses needed was approximately every 20 minutes. Each surgery lasted less than two 

hours. 

ATTACHMENT OF “HALO” 

This implant was used for painless head fixation during recordings to reduce motion artefacts 

and ensure stable data quality (see Pigarev et al., 2009, for a detailed description of the techniques, 

and Levichkina et al., 2021, for their application in cats ). After anesthetizing the animal and placing 

its head in the stereotaxic frame, the soft tissues were removed from the dorsal surface of its skull. 

Eight small orthopaedic screws were inserted into the skull without penetrating the dura, 

approximately 15 mm from the sagittal suture on both the left and right sides. These screws were 

connected by stainless steel wire to serve as the base of the halo frame. The frame was reinforced 

with dental acrylic cement, which was also used to create a thin covering lay er on the skull surface. 

A pair of EEG screw electrodes made of Elgiloy were screwed in through 2 mm craniotomies 

above the occipital and frontal lobes and covered with acrylic cement. Stereotaxic coordinates were 

transferred onto the transparent covering layer, and one or two 2 m m craniotomies were made at the 

coordinates above the hippocampus. These craniotomies were covered with sterile conical tubes 

filled with sterile bone wax to serve as guiding tubes for electrode penetrations. This technique 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

permitted multiple electrode penetrations through the same craniotomy and allowed for easy 

repositioning of the craniotomy to change the recording site if necessary, as 2 mm craniotomies 

healed quickly after the guiding tube's removal. 

The halo enabled painless head fixation while allowing sufficient body movement, so the cat 

could assume a comfortable position and change it at will, apart from the head position. Training for 

this started two -week s after the surgery. The training duration (maximum of 4 hours) was guided by 

the cat’s acceptance and usually took 2 –3 weeks, at which point the animal began to sleep with its 

head fixed, as required for the planned experiments. It has been noticed in exper iments on cats in 

Moscow by author Pigarev and on macaques in Melbourne by all three authors that during periods 

when the animals were not engaged in a behavioural task, they often tend to fall asleep. This is 

likely due to the relaxation of the neck muscl es, since the muscles are relieved of the weight of the 

head by the head fixation. 

Recordings were made from the right hippocampus in cat 1 at the following coordinates: AP +2 

mm, LAT 9 mm. In cat 2, recordings were made from both left and right hippocampi at AP +5 mm, 

LAT 5 mm, and AP +6 mm, LAT 3.5 mm, respectively. In both animals, th e recording depth ranged 

from 11 to 13.5 mm from the cortical surface. These coordinates corresponded to the dorsal 

hippocampus, with the vertical tracks passing through cornu ammonis (CA) and then the fascia 

dentata (FD). 

Although a general trend for functional separation between the dorsal (primarily “cognitive”) 

and ventral (primarily “visceral”) hippocampus exists in many mammals (Fanselow and Dong, 

2010; reviewed by Strange et al., 2014), this transition is smooth. In c ats, the dorsal hippocampus is 

influenced by respiration (e.g., Poe et al., 1996) and its stimulation can induce apnoea. Examination 

of afferent connections to the cat hippocampus has demonstrated that dorsal portions receive inputs 

from brain sites associ ated with viscerosensation, such as the ventroposterior thalamus and the 

cingulate and orbitofrontal cortices (Irle and Markowitsch, 1982), suggesting that they process 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

interoceptive signals . Although some of the visceral signals , such as breathing can be perceived 

exteroceptively, especially in wakefulness, for simplicity we refer to visceral -locked hippocampal 

modulation as interoceptive processing or interoception. 

We chose to target the dorsal rather than the ventral hippocampus primarily for easier access via 

vertical electrode penetrations. This approach was important in our study to limit potential brain 

damage, which would be more likely to occur with deeper pen etrations required for sampling the 

ventral hippocampus over the study's duration. It is quite possible that recording activity from the 

ventral hippocampus would have yielded a higher estimate of the proportions of hippocampal cells 

synchronized to different visceral events. However, our focus on the dorsal hippocampus provides 

at least a minimal view of hippocampal synchronization to visceral events. 

IMPLANTATION OF DUODENAL AND GASTRIC ELECTRODES 

Bipolar electrodes made of silver were implanted into the walls of the duodenum and stomach 

(under the serous membrane) to record myoelectrical activity from these organs. The procedure has 

been previously described by Papasova and Milenov (1965), Papasova et al. (1966), and Pigarev et 

al. (2013). In short, this laparotomy procedure was conducted under general anaesthesia and aimed 

to place flattened and polished silver electrodes under the serous membrane of the duodenal wall to 

access activity of the muscularis externa. The electrodes were secured in place using absorbable 

sutures penetrating serosa only. These bipolar electrodes had a 2 mm inter -electrode distance, as a 

shorter distance minimizes signal disturbances caused by postural changes during wakefulness. The 

electrode leads, ma de of thin and flexible insulated wires, were passed under the skin using a 

tunneler to a connector attached to the halo frame. The leads were coiled under the skin to enable 

posture changes without the leads being pulled from the duodenal or stomach wall. These leads ,

however , had a limited lifespan due to wear and tear from the animal’s movements and peristalsis as 

well as the suture absorption time .

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 

To ensure signal quality and duration of recordings necessary to obtain sufficient amount of 

data, a pair of bipolar electrodes was implanted, 5 cm apart, in the duodenal wall. The best signal 

was later selected for analysis in one of the animals. In the o ther animal, both duodenal electrodes 

provided good -quality signals throughout the entire experimental period, and both signals were used 

for further analysis. Data collection commenced after a recovery period of at least 4 weeks. 

DATA ACQUISITION 

The animals were fed a half of a standard can of wet cat food (approx. 40 -45g portion) 

before the start of each recording. Satiety is known to induce sleepiness and this approach nearly 

guaranteed that SWS would be recorded during a daily session. 

Hippocampal activity was recorded using a pair of tungsten varnish -coated microelectrodes in a 

bipolar mode. The two electrodes had impedances ranging from 0.5 to 1 .5 MΩ and were implanted 

with a 300 μm distance between their tips. They were inserted together through conical guiding 

tubes and moved along the vertical axis using a custom -made microdrive attached to the halo frame. 

Such bipolar recording increases the ne uron/recording yield and also allows for the analysis of local 

field potentials. The electrodes were repositioned prior to every recording session to access a new 

group of hippocampal neurons. Each repositioning was at least 200 microns but could be larger if 

no clear spiking activity was observed after the move. 

Raw signals were amplified by a bipolar amplifier (NeuroBioLab) in the 0.3 –3000 Hz range, 

sampled at 10,000 Hz, and stored for offline analysis. These neuronal recordings were then filtered 

offline in the 0.3 –250 Hz range to analyse local field potentials (LFPs) and in the 300 –3000 Hz 

range to assess spiking activity. To distinguish action potentials from different hippocampal neurons 

surrounding the electrode tips, neuronal signals were spike -sorted using the inbuilt algorithm of 

Spike 2 software (Cambridge Electronic Design Limited), which takes into account spike 

amplitude, polarity, and waveform shape (for further details and an example of the process, see 

Levichkina et al., 2021). Spike 2 software has an inbuilt check for ISI violation and provides PCA 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 

visualization tool that were used during spike sorting. As discussed by Pedreira et al. (2012), the 

maximum number of correctly identified neurons by this type of algorithm typically ranges between 

6 and 10 cells due to algorithm saturation, although the number of cells in the tissue close to the 

electrode tip can be much higher. This also varies depending on electrode impedance and tissue 

geometry. In our experiments, cell yield per recording site varied between 3 and 9 neurons. 

Duodenal and gastric myoelectrical signals were amplified in the 0.3 to 70 Hz range and 

sampled at 200 Hz. To record the ECG, we used one of the duodenal electrodes and the epidurally 

implanted grounding screw. The signal was sampled at 1 kHz. Signals rela ted to respiration were 

obtained from the nasal airflow, registered via thermo -sensors placed in front of the animal’s nose, 

with a 200 Hz sampling rate. The frequency range for both signals was 0.3 to 70 Hz. An infrared 

oculometer was utilized to record e ye movements at 200 Hz sampling rate. 

DATA ANALYSIS 

STATISTICAL ANALYSIS 

We used a bootstrapping approach to evaluate the statistical significance of the relationship 

between neuronal spike trains and visceral events for the analysis of (i) hippocampal neuronal 

responses triggered by visceral events (ii) visceral activity modul ated by hippocampal neuronal 

spikes and (iii) hippocampal LFP responses to periodic visceral events. Further details of the 

procedures are provided in the corresponding sub -sections of the Data Analysis section. In short, it 

included the following steps: 

1. Subdividing simultaneous recordings of hippocampal, mainly aperiodic, signals and the visceral, 

mainly periodic, signals into two sets, one for the SWS intervals and one for wakefulness intervals. 

2. For each of the above sets (wakefulness and sleep), calculation of average signal amplitude 

changes over a period common to the visceral signal in question (say, a respiratory cycle) or the 

empirically chosen corresponding intervals for the aperiodic signal train. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

3. For event -triggered analysis - calculating the number of visceral events that occurred within the 

wakefulness or sleep interval and placing the same numbers of pseudo -markers over the same 

intervals for triggering “random” averaging that is event -unrela ted. For spike -triggered analysis, the 

number of pseudo -markers was equal to the number of neuronal action potentials that occurred over 

the interval in question. 

4. Repeating the process 1000 times, 1000 pseudo -modulation values of the signal amplitude were 

calculated for every cell/visceral signal. 

5. The actual amplitude modulation was then classified as significant if it exceeded 95% of the 

pseudo -modulation values. 

To analyse predisposition of the LFP responses to micro -sleep and micro -wakefulness episodes 

we used Similarity Index (see Fedorov et al., 2023 for a detailed description of the method and the 

freely available Matlab code, https://github.com/george -fedorov /erp -correlations). High similarity 

index indicates that an individual (single -trial) LFP has a shape close to the averaged LFP response. 

With this method, we separated individual LFP responses to visceral events into high -similarity 

(r²>0.4) and low -simil arity groups (r² < 0.1) to further compare the spectral composition of 

hippocampal activity close to where the LFPs occurred between these two groups using the 

Wilcoxon rank sum test. The goal of this comparison was to establish whether high -similarity LFP s

belong to a particular state of vigilance or distributed randomly between them. Details of this 

analysis can be found in the sub -section titled “LFP responses to periodic visceral events and 

vigilance state dependency of LFP responses”. χ2 with Yates correction was applied to test for 

predispositions of neuronal activity to a particu lar state of vigilance. 

We used the Wilcoxon rank -sum test ( p<0.05 ) to test action potential shapes for electrode 

displacement, using the approach of Mosher et al. (2020). For details, see “ Spike shape test for 

electrode displacement” section. All analyses were conducted using Matlab software package 

version R2019B (RRID:SCR_001622). 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 

Our experimental design, based on recording of natural (in contrast to experimentally elicited) 

signals, did not allow us to solve “chicken or the egg” problem – we could only establish presence 

or absence of synchronization between visceral and hippocampal signals, not the direction or any 

common driving force for such synchronization. 

STATE OF VIGILANCE ASSESSMENT 

The animals were video -monitored during the recording sessions to assist in estimating the 

state of vigilance as well as in artefact rejection. The state of vigilance was assessed twice 

independently, first preliminar ily during recording by direct observation of the animal’s behaviour 

and brain activity to ensure the presence of the necessary states of vigilance, and then off -line using 

EEG, ECG, and the data on eye movements and breathing pattern. The presence of high -amplitude 

delta waves in the EEG signal, absence of bodily movements, reduction in amplitude and slowing 

of eye movements, decrease in heart rate and slow and regular breathing indicated SWS. Open eyes 

with the presence of saccades, overall alertness (e.g., redirection of the ears towards new sounds), 

desynchronized EEG and increased frequency and va riability of both heart rate and breathing 

pattern indicated wakefulness. In the analysis described further, we used periods of recording 

containing either SWS or wakefulness without motion artefacts. Transitional states and REM were 

excluded from the anal ysis since due to their shorter durations these states had drastically fewer 

visceral activity periods available for the analysis. 

In cat 1 we recorded between 1 and 4 sleep -wake cycles per recording session (N complete 

daily sessions = 10), and in cat 2 - from 1 to 7 sleep -wake cycles per recording session (N complete 

daily sessions = 12). Total length of recording ranged from 1319 to 7367 seconds in cat 1 and from 

607 to 4322 seconds in cat 2. Usable recording time per session ( after excluding artifacts and 

transition al states, and checking for data quality allowing placement of the visceral activities 

markers) ranged from 922 to 338 3 sec in cat 1 and from 418 to 2720 sec in cat 2. Usable time in 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

wakefulness ranged from 417 to 1782 sec in cat 1 and from 153 to 846 sec in cat 2, in sleep in was 

ranged from 177 to 1975 sec in cat 1 and from 503 to 2067 sec in cat 2. 

VISCERAL EVENT -TRIGGERED NEURONAL RESPONSES 

For each hippocampal cell, we assessed whether its spike rate was modulated by periodic 

visceral events, such as heart rate, breathing and duodenal myoelectrical activity. The analysis was 

performed separately for intervals of sleep and wakefulness within each recording session. Markers 

for each type of visceral activity were created using a templating process similar to the spike sorting 

method using the Spike 2 software. The process involved selecting a typical shape of the periodic 

activity in question a nd creating a template, with each templated event serving as a marker for 

further analysis. 

We excluded from the analysis those intervals during which the signal changed in such a way 

that markers could not be reliably constructed. This was necessary because motion artefacts produce 

events that could be misconstrued as genuine visceral events. M oreover, for duodenal activity, a 

change in the animal’s posture or a period of vigorous peristaltic activity could sometimes 

substantially alter the shape of the signal, although its periodic structure remained clear. In such 

recording sessions, the most consistent shape was used as a template of duodenal activity. Figure 

1.C. demonstrates examples of raw visceral signals and the markers derived from these signals. 

Duodenal myoelectric activity reflects two physiologically distinct types of signals. The first is a 

low -frequency activity called simple waves (or electrical control activity), which represents the 

activity of the enteric nervous system. This type of activity is related to the possibility of duodenal 

wall contractions and defines their timing, but it occurs regardless of any actual contractions and is 

intrinsic ally periodic. We further refer to this type of activity as "simple waves (SW)". The second 

type, high -frequency spike bursts (also known as electrical response activity), is a superimposed 

higher -frequency activity commonly related to the actual contraction of the intestinal wall 

(Papasova and Milenov, 1965; Papasova et al., 1966; Cos ta and Furness, 1982; Sarna, 1989; 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

Martinez -de -Juan et al., 2000). This type of activity is referred to as “simple waves with bursts 

(SB)” . Correspondingly, the first type of activity – SW - is common for the intervals without 

peristaltic activity, during which slow digestive breakdown of food occurs in the intestinal lumen, 

while the second one – SB - can be related to intervals when a food pellet is mixed within or 

moved along the intestine. Thus, different signals can potentially be sent from the intestinal wall to 

the brain via the vagus nerve when either simple waves or bursting activity dominates. 

In the postprandial period, contractions occur at an approximate rate of 4 –5 per minute, while 

the period of simple waves is usually only about 3 seconds long. Typically, a contraction is 

associated with several episodes of bursting activity, some of which precede the actual contraction. 

The energy of simple waves is concentrated below 2 Hz, while for the bursts of spike potentials it is 

above 2 Hz, with most of their energy within the 2 –10 Hz range (Sarna, 1989; Martinez -de -Juan et 

al., 2000; Garcia -Casado et al., 2005, 2006). 

After assigning a marker to every simple wave, the resulting markers were separated by spectral 

analysis into two groups, as in our earlier studies (Levichkina et al., 2006; Pigarev et al., 2013): (1) 

true simple waves (SW) and (2) waves that also containe d higher -frequency bursts (SB). In our 

experience, the best separation of higher -frequency bursts from simple waves can be achieved by 

band -pass filtering the raw signal in the 6 –35 Hz range and using a sum of the spectral power to 

reveal the bursts superi mposed on simple waves. We then used these two types of duodenal activity 

markers independently to trigger spike rate averaging of hippocampal activity. 

STATISTICAL ANALYSIS OF THE VISCERAL EVENT -TRIGGERED NEURONAL 

RESPONSES 

The hippocampal spike train was binned every 1 ms, smoothed by a Gaussian kernel with a 

sigma of 20 ms and averaged using markers of visceral activity as triggers. The highest spike rate 

difference between two points within one period of the observed visce ral signal was taken as the 

putative value of spike rate modulation. Since the resulting spike rate difference could be caused 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

potentially by a random variation of the spike rate, it was necessary to test the significance of such 

modulation. To do so, we randomly placed the same number of pseudo -markers for each SWS and 

wakefulness period in a particular recording session as the n umber of activity periods derived from 

the observed periodic visceral signal for the same interval. We then used these pseudo -markers for 

triggering spike rate averaging. This process was repeated 1000 times for every cell across intervals 

of sleep and wak efulness. As a result, 1000 pseudo -modulation values were calculated. The actual 

spike rate modulation over a period of a visceral signal was deemed significant if it exceeded 95% 

of these pseudo -modulation values. 

SPIKE SHAPE TEST FOR ELECTRODE DISPLACEMENT 

Some periodic visceral signals, such as breathing and blood pressure changes associated with 

heartbeats, may have the potential to displace brain tissue in the vicinity of an electrode due to brain 

pulsations caused by them. These mechanical changes may, i n turn, lead to alterations in the 

recorded spike shapes (Mosher et al., 2020). As spike sorting algorithms rely on spike shape 

templating and allow a pre -set amount of noise to be superimposed on a spike shape, these shape 

changes can potentially translat e into algorithm performance variations along the periods of 

breathing and heart rate, causing artifacts in spike rate estimation. The presence of such changes 

depends on various factors, including the animal's brain size, the proximity of an electrode to large 

blood vessels, and the "stickiness" of an electrode - different electrode shapes and materials may 

result in varying propensities to either move with the tissue or move away from it. Our bipolar 

electrode, with two electrodes manufactured to have small balls at their tips and inserted together, 

was designed to reduce the displacement effect. However, it was s till necessary to test whether the 

observed significant changes in spike rates were associated with the transfer of visceral information 

or simply reflected these so -called pulsatile artefacts. 

To test this, in every trial (a single period of either heart rate or breathing rate), we took all 

hippocampal spike shapes from the intervals surrounding the identified minimum and maximum of 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 

the averaged spike rate along the period of the signal in question. The interval was equal to 20 ms 

(±10ms from a peak or a trough) in most cases. However, for the rarely spiking cells, we increased 

it to 30 ms to collect enough spikes for further comparis ons. Mosher et al. (2020) analysed multiple 

parameters of the extracellular spike shape and demonstrated that the two most sensitive to tissue 

displacement ones are the spike amplitude (AMP) and its half -width (HW). We calculated these 

parameters as sugges ted by Mosher et al. and compared these values between the spikes 

surrounding a peak and those surrounding a trough using the Wilcoxon Rank Sum test. If the spike 

shapes in our case were indeed distorted by tissue displacement, the highest spike shape diff erence 

was expected to be between these intervals. This analysis was performed individually for each of 

the cells that demonstrated significant changes in their spike rates along either the heart or breathing 

periods, but not for the duodenum rate -related cells since duodenal peristaltic activity cannot 

displace brain tissue. The analysis revealed only a minor presence of the displacement effect in our 

data: We found at least one of the two spike shape parameters to be significantly different (p<0.05) 

for 4 cells for the breathing -associated spike rates (3 of these 4 cells belonged to the same recording 

site) and 2 for the heart rate. These cells were excluded from the results presented in this paper. 

SPIKE -TRIGGERED VISCERAL ACTIVITY MODULATION 

The activity of hippocampal neurons might be associated with specific visceral events, such as a 

deep sigh, rather than aligned with the period of regular visceral events like breathing rate. 

Additionally, some visceral signals, such as stomach myoelectric activity, may lack stable 

periodicity. To investigate the relationships between hippocampal cell activity and these types of 

visceral events, we performed a spike -triggered average (STA) of visceral activity. This analysis 

was conducted for stomach myoelectric signals, breathing, averaged heart rate, and the envelope of 

the high -frequency component of the duodenal signal, which is related to the preparation and 

execution of peristalsis. Spike triggering can reveal whether spiking changes are aligned with 

changes in the amplitude of a visceral signal rather than its period. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

STA was computed using the timing of every spike from a particular neuron as a trigger for 

averaging the visceral signal. For periodic signals of varying amplitudes, the goal of STA analysis 

was to test for a possible link between high -amplitude visceral e vents and neuronal spiking 

frequency. In this case STA amplitude was measured at an interval equal to a period of a visceral 

signal in question +1 second to account for a possible variability of a period. For aperiodic signals 

such as stomach myoelectric activity and mean heart rate, the interval of averaging was chosen 

arbitrarily based on the observed natural intervals of modulation for these signals. We chose ±6 

second period for stomach activity and ±30 seconds for heart rate. 

The flanking parts of the vigilance state interval of the analysis were excluded from STA 

calculation to prevent mixing vigilance states during averaging. These excluded parts were equal to 

half of the period of averaging at the beginning and end of the vi gilance state interval. 

The envelope of the high -frequency component of the duodenal signal was calculated by 

detrending the raw signal, bandpass -filtering it (6 to 35 Hz, Butterworth, 6th order, bidirectional), 

and taking the absolute value of a Hilbert -transformed signal. 

Heart rate was calculated as a sum of heartbeats occurring in 10 seconds, with a 10ms step. 

Stomach activity could be contaminated by breathing when diaphragm movements affect the area of 

the electrode placement. That effect depended mainly on the animal's posture. If a hippocampal 

neuron actually responds to a breathing rate or to sighing, the STA of stomach activity would show 

the breathing dependency rather than reflect stomach activity. Although stomach activity could have 

frequency components similar t o the breathing period, it was impossible in our experiment to 

distinguish the origin of STA in such cases. Therefore, we decided to exclude from the stomach 

activity analysis all STA results where the resulting STA wave had frequencies less than 2 breathi ng 

periods. That caused a reduction in the reported stomach -related STAs. 

STATISTICAL ANALYSIS OF SPIKE -TRIGGERED VISCERAL ACTIVITY MODULATION 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

Statistical analysis was based on bootstrapping . The number of neuronal spikes within any 

interval in question (corresponding to wakefulness or SWS) was calculated and the same number of 

random pseudo -spike markers was generated across the same interval and used to calculate pseudo -

STA. This process wa s repeated 1000 times for every cell and 1000 pseudo -STA values were 

obtained. The actual STA value was considered significant if it exceeded 95% of the pseudo -STA 

values. 

LFP RESPONSES TO PERIODIC VISCERAL EVENTS AND VIGILANCE STATE 

DEPENDENCY OF LFP RESPONSES 

We also analysed evoked LFPs in a manner similar to the previously described analysis of 

visceral event -triggered neuronal spiking responses. While neuronal spiking reflects the output of a 

specific brain region, local field potentials (LFPs) are more clos ely related to its input, as they 

represent the summation of dendrosomatic synaptic signals (Logothetis, 2002 ; Raichle and Mintun, 

2006 ).

However, as LFPs are known to be affected by pulsatile artifacts (Fee, 2000; Mosher et al., 

2020), it is usually recommended to filter the LFP signal at a frequency cut -off above the heart rate 

frequency. The actual metabolic changes associated with brain tissue perfusion and changes in CO2 

levels resulting from neuronal activity are also very likely to produce LFP changes, and recent 

studies have uncovered a mechanism of direct pulse wave detection by mitral cells of the olfactory 

bulb (Salameh et al., 202 4). However, these real changes are difficult to distinguish from pulsatile 

artifacts in experiments conducted with non -anesthetized animals. Therefore, we used a 5 Hz to 125 

Hz bandpass filter (Butterworth, 6th order, bidirectional) before calculating hea rtbeat -evoked LFPs. 

At the same time, it has been established that breathing -evoked LFPs exist without tissue 

displacement (e.g., reviewed by Tort et al., 2018), and these responses aren't normally regarded as 

artefact -produced. Thus, we used a 0.3 to 125 Hz range for the analysis of breathing -related as well 

as duodenal activity -related LFP responses to avoid losing low -frequency components of the 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

evoked potentials. Bootstrapping -based analysis was conducted separately for sleep and 

wakefulness intervals, as described above. 

STATIS TICAL ANALYSIS OF THE VIGILANCE STATE DEPENDENCY OF LFP RESPONSES 

When significant LFP responses were observed in both vigilance states, we performed 

additional analysis to determine whether LFP responses had similar characteristic (shapes and 

amplitudes) across the entire length of the vigilance state in question or occurred during putative 

micro -sleep or micro -wakefulness episodes . Instead of pre -defining such episodes, which can be 

tricky in cats and can only be made by arbitrary thresholding EEG or LFP, we decided to test 

whether difference in the evoked responses statistically significantly corresponded to differences in 

LFP spectra. We refer to the episodes of heightened low frequency part of the spectra during 

wakefulness as micro -sleep episode and the opposite – diminished low frequency activity during 

SWS without transitioning to REM – as micro -wakefulness episodes. 

For this analysis we sorted individual LFP shapes trial -by -trial into groups of low and high 

similarity with the averaged evoked LFP response using an r² -based Similarity Index (see Fedorov 

et al., 2023 for a detailed description of the method and the freely available Matlab code). We 

compared the spectra of high -similarity trial L FPs (r²>0.4) to the spectra of low -similarity trial 

LFPs (r²<0.1) in two frequency ranges related to sleep: delta (1 -4 Hz) and spindles (7 -15 Hz), using 

the Wilcoxon rank sum test. This procedure allowed us to determine whether the trials contributing 

to t he averaged evoked LFP occurred during more drowsy or more alert states. 

NUMBER OF CELLS AVAILABLE FOR THE ANALYSIS 

Neuronal activity was recorded from 213 individual hippocampal cells (135 cells from cat 1 and 

78 cells from cat 2). As described above, STA of stomach activity could only be analysed if it was 

not contaminated by breathing, so we restricted this part of t he analysis to 107 cells. Additionally, 

we limited the analysis of breathing -related neuronal activity to 184 cells due to poor breathing 

signals in 2 recording sessions and the exclusion of 4 cells with spike shapes influenced by tissue 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

displacement. For the remaining types of recorded visceral signals, relationships between visceral 

and hippocampal activities were analysed for each of the 213 cells. 

Both duodenal electrodes were preserved in cat 2 for the entire duration of the experiment. We 

studied the relationships between duodenal and hippocampal activities using signals from both 

electrodes since different sections of the duodenum do not act sync hronously. 

We presented the results as percentages of cells that had their activity significantly modulated 

along a period of the visceral activity in question or as a percentage of cells that triggered 

significant visceral STAs (above 95% confidence interval, based on the bootstrapping analysis) and 

as proportions of cells having such significant modulation. Assuming the 5% error "built -in" to the 

statistical method (p=0.05), one can expect 5% of cell modulations to be deemed significant despite 

actually being random. Thus, reporting the results as percentages allows the reader to get a correct 

impression of the results' validity. Additionally, we report percentages of cells with modulation 

significance >1% (p<0.01) to further clarify the results. 

CORRECTION FOR MULTIPLE COMPARISONS 

The problem of multiple comparisons was tackled in two steps. First, binomial enrichment 

test was used for each one of the bootstrapping -based results reported (e.g., separately for cells 

modulated by breathing in SWS vs modulated by breathing in wakefulness , etc.). Enrichment test 

allows to estimate whether a category o f outcomes occurs more frequently than expected by chance 

in a particular dataset (e.g., Weinstein et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024; Ferguson et al., 2025). The 

resulting binomial enrichment test p -values were further corrected for multiple comparisons using 

the Benjamini –Hochberg FDR procedure across all binomial tests performed (q < 0.05 considered 

significant). 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

RESULTS 

Basal frequency rates of the registered visceral activities for each of the cats are presented in 

Table 1 , separately for SWS and wakefulness . HR and BR rates were within ranges commonly 

reported for domestic cats, SW data for various parts of the intestinal tract in cats (e.g. specifically 

for the duodenum) are too rare in the existing literature to provide a standard background. 

Table 1 . Basal frequencies of the registered rhythmical interoceptive signals. 

SWS  Wakefulness 

Cat 1  Cat 2  Cat 1  Cat 2 

BR, Hz  0.35  0.46  0.43  0.52 

HR, Hz  2.12  2.72  2.29  2.82 

SW, Hz  0.31  0.45  0.31  0.45 

Mean breathing rates were significantly higher during wakefulness comparing to SWS in each of 

the animals (Wilcoxon sign ed -rank test, cat 1 p= 0.0117, mean BR in wakefulness 0.43 Hz, BR in 

SWS 0.35 Hz; cat 2 p = 0.002, BR in wakefulness was 0.52 Hz , in SWS 0.46 Hz). Similarly, heart 

rates changed between wakefulness and sleep in both animals as well (Wilcoxon sign ed -rank test, 

cat 1 p= 0.0195, mean HR in wakefulness 2.29 Hz, HR in SWS 2.12 Hz; cat 2 p = 0.0049, HR in 

wakefulness 2.82 Hz in SWS 2.72 Hz). These results further confirm the quality of state of 

vigilance classification. The differences in absolute values between animals were due to the 

disparity in th eir corresponding body sizes – cat 1 had larger body frame and body weight. 

Duodenal baseline rate (SW) did not change significantly between states of vigilance (p>0.05 for 

each of the animals). SW rate in cat 1 was 0.31Hz in both states, while in cat 2 it was 0.45 Hz in 

both states as well. 

Gastric rhythmicity is intrinsically slow (approx. 3 per minute in humans and 4 per minute 

in cats, Xue et al., 1995) with amplitude, velocity, and frequency fluctuating due to neural/hormonal 

inputs, distension, a nd regional gradients, making i t too difficult to use for event -triggering analysis, 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

especially since intervals of deep SWS and clear wakefulness in cats often last only a few minutes. 

We therefore used only spike -triggered approach to analyse stomach activity. 

Mean background spike rates for all the recorded hippocampal cells were 20.6 (SD ±21.4) in 

wakefulness and 15.9 (SD ±19.2) in SWS. This difference in spiking was significant (p=0.012, 

Wilcoxon rank sum test). Previous cat studies demonstrated vigilance -state modulation of 

hippocampal spiking, with reduced pyramidal discharge in deep SWS in some recordings from 

dorsal hippocampus and the opposite effect - strong SWS -linked spike rate enhancement in ventr al 

hippocampus (Noda et al., 1969; Hartse et al., 1979; Marczynski et al., 1980). Our results are 

consistent with previously estimated ones from feline dorsal hippocampus. 

RESPIRATION -RELATED NEURONAL ACTIVITY 

Our results revealed that respiration provided the most significant influence on hippocampal 

activity. This was not surprising, as the effects of breathing on hippocampal activity was described 

in various species (Duffin and Hockman, 1972; Frysinger et al. , 1989; Poe et al., 1996; Radna and 

MacLean, 1981; Herrero et al., 2018; Tort et al., 2018; Folschweiller and Sauer, 2021; Nokia and 

Penttonen, 2022), and the high magnitude of this effect noted. However, a new effect emerged when 

we analysed these depende ncies separately in wakefulness and sleep. The majority of cells 

exhibited significant relationships to breathing either in wakefulness or in sleep, but not in both 

states. The event -triggered analysis showed that 20.1% (37/184) of cells were significantly 

synchronized to breathing in wakefulness, 22.8% (42/184) in SWS and 3.8% (7/184 ) in both states. 

Additionally, 17.9% of them had high modulation significance (p<0.01). These proportions of 

synchronisation between hippocampal activity and BR were significant according to binomial 

enrichment test and survived FDR at q<0.001. 

Modulation of baseline spiking by a rhythmical event was calculated for every cell as the following: 

Modulation, % = ((max spike rate – min spike rate) / mean spike rate) * 100) – 100 .

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

The m odulation value therefore demonstrates the change between maximal and minimal spike rate 

of a cell along the cycle of a particular visceral activity as a percent age of its mean rate. We 

conducted these calculations separately for each state. Mean modulation for cells with significant 

synchronisation to BR in wakefulness was equal to 25% (SD±36), while in SWS it was 17% 

(SD±14.8). 

Figures 2 and 3 show examples of significant relationships between cell spike rates and 

breathing. For clarity, all panels in each figure represent the same cell. The cell represented in 

Figure 2 exhibited strong tonic synchronization to normal breathing i n SWS, while the cell 

demonstrated in Figure 3 responded only to high -amplitude breathing events. Panel 2.A illustrates 

the animal's breathing and neuronal spiking of one cell in two states – wakefulness (red) and sleep 

(blue). The upper part of panel 2.B shows the cell's averaged activity in wakefulness (red line) and 

SWS (blue line), while the bottom part of that panel displays the corresponding averaged breathing 

(registered by the nasal thermistor). The cell's activity did not appear to be related to br eathing 

during wakefulness, while in sleep, its activity became more regular with patches of spikes aligned 

with breathing. However, since some cells switch to a "burst -pause" mode in SWS, it was essential 

to statistically test whether the modulation of ce ll activity indeed occurs in line with the breathing 

cycle. This cell indeed had significant breathing -related responses in SWS (p<0.01). 

Activity of the hippocampal cells could be related to some specific events rather than following 

breathing activity regularly. While the cell represented by Figure 2.B was tracking breathing in a 

tonic fashion in SWS, its STA (Fig 2.C) demonstrates moderat e, although significant, modulation in 

SWS as well. In contrast, Figure 3.C provides a dramatic example of such a relationship for a cell 

that responded specifically to high -amplitude respiratory events and only during wakefulness. To 

highlight this depend ency, panel 3.A shows the cell's spiking and 3 corresponding episodes of 

breathing: high amplitude in wakefulness, high amplitude in SWS, and shallow breathing in 

wakefulness. One can see that only high -amplitude respiratory events during wakefulness were 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 

associated with a substantial increase in the cell's spike rate. The cell's spiking rate dramatically 

increased when breathing amplitude was high during wakefulness, but not in SWS. 

Figure 2 . Example of hippocampal activity tonically synchronized to breathing in sleep. 

.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint 27 

A.  Breathing and neuronal spiking of a single cell one cell in two states. Air flow measured by 

nasal thermistor is shown in red during wakefulness in blue in SWS. Individual cell action 

potentials are represented by vertical lines above the corresponding bre athing signal. 

B.  Top panel: event -triggered activity of the same cell, air flow markers served for event -

triggering. Solid lines show spike rate average; transparent areas represent the standard 

error. Bottom panel shows average air flow signal. Blue is reserved for sleep and red for 

wakefulness. These colours and transparency are used in the same way throughout the 

Results figures. 

C.  STA of the air flow signal triggered by activity of the same cell. 

D.  Event -triggered response of hippocampal LFP to breathing. The LFP was derived from the 

same raw signal as the cell activity depicted above (same recording site). 

STA analysis revealed a larger difference between states than the event -triggered one, with 23% 

(42/184 ) of cells in wakefulness, 42.9% (79/184 ) in SWS and 12% (22/184 ) in both. 45.2% of them 

had high modulation significance (p<0.01). These proportions of synchronisation between 

hippocampal activity and breathing were significant according to binomial enrichment test and 

survived FDR at q<0.001 just like for the event -triggered analysis. 

This sleep preponderance of STAs was highly significant ( χ2 with Yates correction = 7.38, p = 

0.006) for the entire population of cells as well as for each of the animals individually ( cat 1 χ² = 

8.7, p = 0.003; cat 2 χ² = 5.64, p = 0.017 ).

A high proportion of cells (21.8%) demonstrated significant synchronization to regular 

breathing in conjunction with significant STA in the same vigilance state. This indicates that the 

level of cell spiking modulation by breathing can change over time, even within the same vigilance 

state. 

We also observed significant synchronization of LFPs to breathing (40% of recording sites in 

SWS and 47% in wakefulness , surviving enrichment test an d FDR at q<0.001 ). However, unlike 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

individual cells, LFPs were often synchronized to breathing in both vigilance states, with 23% of 

recording sites showing significant synchronization in both states. This prompted further 

investigation into the preference of LFP responses to micro -sleep or micro -wakefulness episodes. 

The analysis revealed a preponderance of LFPs with significant relationships to breathing to 

episodes of higher delta power (Wilcoxon rank sum test, p<0.05). The majority of such recording 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

Figure 3. Example of hippocampal activity selectively synchronized to high -amplitude breathing in 

wakefulness. 

A.  Breathing and neuronal spiking of a single cell in SWS and wakefulness. Top panel – deep 

breathing in wakefulness, middle panel - shallow breathing in wakefulness, bottom panel -

deep breathing in SWS. Air flow measured by nasal thermistor is shown in red during 

wakefulness in blue in SWS. Individual cell action potentials are represented by vertical 

lines above the corresponding breathing signal. 

B.  Mean air flow signal. Note that its average amplitude is not higher in wakefulness. 

C.  STA of the air flow signal triggered by activity of the same cell. 

Event -triggered response of hippocampal LFP to breathing. The LFP was derived from the same 

raw signal as the cell activity depicted above (same recordin g site). 

sites tended to have pronounced LFP responses to breathing during deeper sleep states in SWS and 

higher levels of delta activity during wakefulness, likely representing micro -sleep/drowsiness states 

punctuating wakefulness. Among the 23% of recording sites which synchronized to breathing in 

both states, 20% showed synchronization during higher delta activity in SWS and 17% during 

higher delta activity in wakefulness. Only one recording site demonstrated the opposite effect 

during wakefulness, and none durin g SWS. This result further confirms the strengthened link 

between breathing and hippocampal activity during sleep and drowsiness. Examples of LFP 

responses to breathing in sleep and wakefulness are demonstrated in Figures 2.D and 3.D for the 

same recording sessions as the other panels of these figures. 

CARDIAC -RELATED NEURONAL ACTIVITY 

A moderate number of hippocampal neurons had spiking modulated along the cardiac cycle, 

and these cells synchronized their activities to heartbeats only in one condition. The event -triggered 

analysis revealed that 7.1% (15/213 ) of cells were linked to heartbeats in wakefulness, 8% (17/213 )

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

in SWS, and no cells had this relationship in both states. Of these cells, 5.2% had modulation 

significance >1%. However, these percentages did not meet the thresholds for FDR (q>0.05). Thus, 

we cannot reliably confirm synchronization between hippocampal spiking activity and individual 

heartbeats. However, as LFP responses demonstrated high sensitivity to heart rate ( see below ), it 

seems likely that some individual cells could also be syn chronized to heartbeat, perhaps without 

maintaining high degree of synchronization all the time but only synchronising to it under some 

conditions. 

Cells synchronized with heartbeats had modulation values in wakefulness equal to -0.4 % (SD± 

23.2), in SWS it was 10.9 % (SD±37). Cells synchronising to this activity had the smallest 

modulation values among all groups of cells. 

Figure 4 provides examples of cell activities synchronized to the heart rate cycle in either 

wakefulness or sleep. Figure 5 demonstrates LFP synchronization to heart beats in wakefulness and 

slow wave sleep. 

Figure 4. Activities of two hippocampal cells (top row), one synchronized with heart rate cycles in 

sleep (left side) and the other in wakefulness (right side). The corresponding averaged ECG signals 

are in the bottom row. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 

JOINT RESPONSES TO BREATHING AND CARDIAC CYCLES 

A few cells had relationships to both the cardiac cycle and the breathing cycle within the same 

states of the sleep -wake cycle. For example, the cell that we show in Fig. 2 as being modulated by 

breathing in sleep also had its activity synchronised to the heart beats, as shown by the same cell in 

Fig 4. Modulation of spiking by two parameters at the same time provides grounds for complex 

entrainment of the hippocampal cells and potentially being triggered at frequencies that may differ 

from the ones in the viscer al periodic activities. 

Figure 5. Event -related hippocampal LFPs responses to heart rate cycle, significant in either 

wakefulness (left side) or sleep (right side). 

STA OF HEART RATE 

In contrast to only moderate association between cell spiking and cardiac cycle, STA of the 

heart rate yielded an unusually high proportion of significant results: 71.8% (153/213) of cells in 

wakefulness, 70% (149/213 ) in SWS, and 50.7% (108/213) in both states. However, it is important 

to note that one cannot draw clear conclusions regarding the relationship between cell spiking and 

heart rate due to the following two confounds: 

(i) Heart rate changes between wakefulness and sleep in a stereotypical way , it is slower and more 

regular in SWS. Simultaneously, some cells also have state -dependent spike rate modulations, thus 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32 

in some cases, the changes would co -occur even without a direct relationship between the cardiac 

cycle and hippocampal activity. 

(ii) The hippocampus is involved in emotion regulation, while heart rate is also dependent on the 

animal's (or person's) emotional state. This also provides grounds for co -occurrence of the two rate 

changes rather than a direct relationship between them. 

Nevertheless, a direct relationship is also possible – after all, the hippocampus is well -

positioned to affect heart rate due to its emotion -regulation properties and connections with the 

hypothalamus and other structures involved in emotional and cardiac regulation (Kishi et al., 2000; 

Petrovich et al., 200 1; Herman et al., 2005; Castle et al., 2005; Dong and Swanson, 2006; Fanselow 

and Dong, 2011). Our experimental setup did not allow us to investigate this question further to 

distinguish co -occurrences from true relationships. We report this effect mainly t o illustrate the 

prevalence of that co -occurrence, which demonstrates that hippocampal spike rate is highly 

associated with heart rate frequency, regardless of the driving force behind that association. This 

can potentially explain the known comorbidities between TLE and emotional disturbances on one 

hand, and, on the other hand, the well -known predictive value of heart rate in vagus nerve 

stimulation (VNS) treatment (Jeppesen et al., 2010; Liu et al., 2018; Karoly et al., 2021). 

Similar to the LFP effects observed for breathing, LFP responses to heartbeats were significant 

in 43% of sites in SWS, 40% in wakefulness, and 23% in both states , with both SWS and 

wakefulness -related proportions surviving enrichment test and FDR at q<0.001 (Figure 5). Thus, 

their predisposition to microsleep/wakefulness was analysed as well. Among the dual -responding 

sites, only 7% in sleep and 13% in wakefulness occurred predominantly during episodes of higher 

delta power. However, in addition, 13% in SWS and 10% in wakefulness preferred episodes of 

higher power in the range of sleep spindles (7 -15Hz), possibly indicating a preponderance to 

relatively light sleep or transitional states, as spindles are associated with NREM -REM transition in 

both cats and hu mans (Gottesmann, 1984; Carrera -Cañas et al., 2019). Thus, in total, nearly half of 

LFP responses had high preponderance of either delta activity or spindles in both SWS and 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

33 

wakefulness. Note that the rest of the synchronisations with heart beats did not have a trend towards 

wakefulness (low delta or spindles states ) but simply did not demonstrate any significant 

preferences. LFP synchronization to cardiac events was, to an extent, sensitive to the state of 

vigilance, demonstrating a preference for sleep similar to the LFP synchronization to breathing, but 

possibly withou t a strong preference for deep sleep. 

GASTROINTESTINAL INFLUENCES 

1. Duodenum 

Duodenal myoelectric signals representing simple waves (SW) and waves with 

superimposed higher frequency bursts (SB) were marked separately, and hippocampal neuronal 

activity was subsequently averaged using them as distinct triggers. For one of the two cat s, 

myoelectric activity was recorded from two electrodes, and neuronal activity was analysed using 

triggering signals from both. The resulting number of analysed pairs of "myoelectric activity –

neuronal activity" was 288, thus we reported percentages wher e 288 is equal to 100%. SWs 

correspond to periods without peristaltic activity in a particular section of the duodenum, while SBs 

are to some extent correlated with peristalsis. Consequently, different types of information about the 

chemical composition of the luminal content and mechanical distention of the duodenal wall should 

be transmitted to the central nervo us system during these periods. The separation between these 

types of signalling was revealed in our data: only 2% of cells had significant synchronization to 

both SW and SB simultaneously, and in wakefulness, that proportion was even smaller (1%). 

1.1 SB and the envelope of high frequency duodenal activity 

Nearly equal numbers of cells synchronized their activities to SB in wakefulness and sleep, 

again with a very small proportion in both conditions. The percentages were: 10.8% (23/213 ) in 

wakefulness, 10.3% (22/213 ), in SWS and 0.95% (2/213 ) in both. 2.8% of cells had high 

modulation significance (p<0.01). Both wakefulness and SWS proportions were significant 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

34 

according to binomial enrichment test , but only wakefulness -related relationship survived FDR (q =

0.033 ), while SWS FDR was marginal (q = 0.07 ). Cells synchronized with duodenal SB had 

modulation values equal to 31% (SD±16) in wakefulness , in SWS it was 42% (SD±38). Figure 6.A 

demonstrates synchronization between a hippocampal neuron and regular SB signal occurring in 

sleep. Panel B shows the synchronization occurring in wakefulness for a different hippocampal 

neuron. LFP responses to SB events were observed in 10% of recording sites in SWS and 12.5% in 

wakefulness, with 0% in both states. Only the wakefulness -related LFP responses were significant 

according to binomial enrichment test, and marginal after FDR ( q = 0.056). 

Fig 6.C shows SB -evoked LFP examples. 

For the pooled data s ignificant STA of the SB envelope was more frequently observed in 

wakefulness ( χ2 with Yates correction = 4.24, p = 0.039, 11.3% (24/213) in wakefulness, 6.15% 

(13/213) in SWS and 1.9% (4/213) in both. 7.3% of them had high modulation significance 

(p<0.01). In addition, only the wakefulness -related proportion survived both enrichment test and 

FDR (q = 0.009) while proportion for SWS was not significant (q = 0.338 ). Due to relatively small 

amounts of cells demonstrating significant STA in each of the animals the individual χ2 did not 

reach significance, however, both animals had similar trends towards having more robust STA 

results in wakefulness. It is expected that not every individual SB can lead to a peristaltic 

movement, and higher SB amplitudes indicate a higher probability of peristaltic activity. Our results 

showed a possible connection between peristaltic activity and hippocampal activity occurring in 

wakefulness. This preponderance to the awake state corresponds to the results showing increased 

duodenal motility in wakefulness compared to SWS (reviewed by, e.g., Duboc et al., 2020). 

1.2 SW 

Significantly more hippocampal cells synchronized to SW in sleep compared to wakefulness 

(χ2 with Yates correction = 8.6, p = 0.003), with 6.6% (14/213) in wakefulness, 15.5% (33/213) in 

SWS and 0.95% (2/213) in both. 4.2% of them had high modulation significance (p<0.01). SWS -

derived p roportion w as significant after binomial enrichment test and FDR ( q = 0.0005 ) while 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

35 

wakefulness -derived one was not significant at the stage of the enrichment test (p = 0.123) . Results 

for each of two animals were similar : cat 1 χ² = 4.18, p = 0.04; cat 2 χ² = 4.61, p = 0.03. 

Figure 6 . Synchronization of hippocampal activity with SB duodenal signals. 

.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint 36 

A.  Activity of a hippocampal cell synchronized to SB in wakefulness, top row. The 

corresponding averaged duodenal myoelectric activity signals are in the bottom row. 

B.  Activity of a hippocampal cell synchronized to SB in sleep, top row. The corresponding 

averaged duodenal myoelectric activity signals are below. 

C.  Event -related hippocampal LFPs responses synchronized with duodenal cycle in either 

wakefulness (left side) or sleep (right side). 

Cells that synchronized with duodenal SW had modulation values in wakefulness equal to 37% 

(SD±32), in SWS it was 31% (SD±19). Figure 7 (panels A and B) shows examples of mean spike 

rates of hippocampal cells selectively synchronizing their activity to SW in either wakefulness or 

sleep. 

The d uodenum has the highest density of nutrient -detecting vagal afferents in the 

gastrointestinal system (Jagger, et al., 1997; Brookes et al., 2013), and hippocampal cells can 

potentially be modulated by strong signals related to the chemical composition of f ood. We 

hypothesized that prolonged exposure of duodenal receptors to ch yme/food bolus would lead to 

more robust chemoreceptive signals ascending via the vagus nerve, thus leading to more robust 

synchronization of hippocampal cells to SW during sleep. LFP was found to be synchronized with 

SW duodenal activity in 20% of cases du ring SWS, 22.5% during wakefulness and 0% in both 

states of vigilance (Fig. 7.C). These proportions were significant according to binomial enrichment 

test, and marginal after FDR (q = 0.056 for both states of vigilance). 

2. Stomach 

We observed nearly equal proportions of significant STAs of stomach activity in SWS and 

wakefulness, namely 29% (31/107) of cells in wakefulness, 26.2% (28/107) of cells in SWS and 

8.4% of cells in both (9/107), both surviving enrichment test and FDR at q <0.001 . 28% of them had 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

37 

high modulation significance (p<0.01). Additionally, in 8.4% of cells, significant STAs were 

observed simultaneously for stomach activity and the envelope of duodenal SB activity. 

.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint 38 

Figure 7 . Synchronization of hippocampal activity with SW duodenal signals. 

A.  Activities of a hippocampal cell synchronized to SW in wakefulness, top row. The 

corresponding averaged duodenal myoelectric activity signals are in the bottom row. 

B.  Activity of a hippocampal cell synchronized to SW in sleep, top row. The corresponding 

averaged duodenal myoelectric activity signals are in the bottom row. 

C.  Event -related hippocampal LFPs responses to duodenal cycle in either wakefulness (left 

side) or sleep (right side). 

Figure 8 illustrates the complexity of hippocampal activity associated with gastrointestinal 

motility. The top rows of panel A show examples of spiking activities for two hippocampal cells, N1 

and N2, recorded simultaneously from left and right hippocampi. The purple line shows the 

corresponding duodenal activity, and the brown line shows stomach activity, all during wakefulness. 

One can see that cell N1 drastically decreased its spiking when stomach activity increased, and 

more pronounced SB activity occurred. In contrast, cell N2 had increased spiking in corresponding 

to stomach activation, and that spiking was of a bursting type, to an extent synchronized to 

duodenal SB. Statistical analysis of the N2 cell activity re vealed that it indeed had both significant 

STA for stomach activity and significant synchronization to duodenal SB, both occurring in 

wakefulness (panels B and C). These kinds of relationships between hippocampal and visceral 

activities can potentially und erlie effects such as eating epilepsy (Nagaraja and Chand, 1984; Girges 

et al., 2020), where strong gastrointestinal stimulation triggers epileptiform activity. 

SYNCHRONIZATION OF HIPPOCAMPAL CELLS TO MORE THAN ONE TYPE OF 

VISCERAL EVENTS 

Hippocampal cells were only rarely synchronized with both cardiorespiratory and intestinal 

activity. Only 3.1% of cells that had synchronization to breathing were also synchronized to either 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

39 

Figure 8 . Hippocampal activity associated with gastrointestinal motility. 

A. Top two rows show examples of spiking activities for two hippocampal cells, N1 and N2, 

recorded simultaneously from left and right hippocampi during wakefulness. Purple trace in 

the next row below represents the corresponding co -registered duodenal acti vity, with purple 

dots marking SB waves, and the brown trace in last row represents the corresponding 

stomach activity. 

B. STA of stomach myoelectric signal to spiking of cell N2. 

C. Event -triggered responses of cell N2 to the peaks of SB waves of duodenal activity. 

SB or SW within the same state of vigilance, and just 0.9% of co -synchronization was observed 

between heartbeats and either SB or SW. Cardiac and respiratory activities are known to be highly 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

40 

correlated and the same can be said for gastric and duodenal activities. However, the relationships 

between the events belonging to these two different groups are not expected to be as strong (e.g., 

gastric and cardiac events are less interrelated than ca rdiac and respiratory ones). One can see that 

for these physiological events with weak functional relationships; hippocampal cells did not 

demonstrate co -synchronizations as well. 

In contrast, the levels of conjoined modulation were high within breathing (when both event -

triggered and spike -triggered analyses showed significant modulation for the same cell in the same 

state of vigilance), with co -modulation levels equal to 21.8%. Co njoined synchronization to 

breathing and heartbeats was at 5.9%. Additionally, 8.4% of cells had significant STAs for both 

stomach activity and the envelope of duodenal SB activity. Thus, co -activation was higher between 

functionally related signals compar ed to unrelated ones. 

To summarise the results, Table 2 demonstrates percentages of hippocampal cells whose 

activities were significantly associated with different types of visceral signals , for pooled data (A) 

as well as individually for each animal (B) .

Results of the LFP analysis demonstrate nearly equal proportions of sites responding in either 

wakefulness or in sleep in synchrony to duodenal SW and SB waves, with absence of simultaneous 

responses in both states. This indicates a high level of segregati on among the networks involved in 

the analysis of intestinal information. Since LFPs are known to primarily reflect inputs to the 

network while spikes are output -related (Logothetis, 2002 ; Raichle and Mintun, 2006 ), the observed 

state -specificity in cell responses, combined with the separation of inputs, suggests that specific 

types of processing related to digestion occur in the hippocampus in both states, albeit in very 

different ways that may support different func tions. Similar differential processing of interoceptive 

information was observed earlier in the insular cortex (Levichkina et al., 2021). 

The signal that had a relatively high proportion of LFPs responsive in both states was breathing. 

However, Similarity index analysis (Fedorov et al., 2023) suggested preferential synchronization of 

the hippocampus to breathing during episodes of high power of delta waves in the EEG, which 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

41 

Table 2 Relationships between recorded visceral signals and hippocampal activity. 

(A) Results are presented for both animals together as percentages of significant relationships 

between hippocampal and visceral signals in either wakefulness or in SWS (bootstrapping -based 

ana lysis, p<0.05). * indicates significant predisposition of visceral activity to be linked to 

hippocampal activity in one of the states of vigilance more frequently that in the other (χ2 with 

Yates correction, p<0.05). Spike -triggered results for the heart rate are excluded to avoid possible 

confound (see Results for further details, section STA OF THE HEART RATE). 

(B) Relationships between recorded visceral signals and hippocampal cells activity for each of two 

animals. * indicates a significant predisposition of that visceral activity to be linked to hippocampal 

cells activity in a particular state of vigilance ( χ2 with Yates correction, p<0.05). 

For the details on the numbers of cells used see Materials and Methods, subsection titled NUMBER 

OF CELLS RECORDED AND AVAILABLE FOR THE ANALYSIS. 

A. 

Event -triggered analysis  Spike -triggered analysis 

State of 

vigilance 

Breathing, 

% and N 

cells 

Heart 

beats, 

% and 

N cells 

Duodenal 

SB, 

% and N 

cells 

Duodenal 

SW, 

% and N 

cells 

Breathing 

amplitude, 

% and N 

cells 

Duodenal 

SB 

envelope, 

% and N 

cells 

Stomach, 

% and N 

cells 

Awake 

only 

20.1% 

37/184 

7.1% 

15/213 

10.8% 

23/213 

6.6% 

14/213 

23% 

42/184 

11.3%* 

24/213 

29% 

31/107 

SWS 

only 

22.8% 

42/184 

8% 

17/213 

10.3% 

22/213 

15.5%* 

33/213 

42.9%** 

79/184 

6.15% 

13/213 

26.2% 

28/107 

both  3.8% 

7/184 

0% 

0/213 

0.95% 

2/213 

0.95% 

2/213 

12% 

22/184 

1.9% 

4/213 

8.4% 

9/107 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

42 

B. 

Event -triggered analysis  Spike -triggered analysis 

State of 

vigilance 

Cat  Breathing, 

N cells 

Heart 

beats, 

N cells 

Duodenal 

SB, 

N cells 

Duodenal 

SW, 

N cells 

Breathing 

amplitude, 

N cells 

Duodenal 

SB 

envelope, 

N cells 

Stomach 

N cells 

Awake 

only 

1 24/121  12/121  11/135  7/135  24/121  10/135  17/72 

2 15/63  3/63  11/78  10/78  18/63  14/78  14/37 

SWS 

only 

1 27/121  6/121  10/135  14/135*  48/121*  6/135  22/72 

2 13/63  12/63  13/78  18/78*  31/63*  7/78  6/37 

both  1 6/121  0/121  1/135  1/135  13/121  0/135  7/72 

2 1/63  0/63  1/78  1/78  9/63  4/78  2/37 

occurred not only during sleep but also during microsleep episodes in wakefulness. The LFP 

responses associated with cardiac cycle also frequently occurred in both states, but they had a 

predilection to synchronize at the presence of either spindles or del ta waves even during 

wakefulness. This highlights the need for a more detailed analysis of LFP responses, especially 

when these responses appear to occur indiscriminately between sleep and wakefulness. 

Discussion 

A growing corpus of literature indicates that bodily rhythms structure hippocampal activity 

during ongoing behaviour . Respiration -coupled hippocampal oscillations are present in awake 

rodents, they modulate neuronal activity and sharp -wave ripples (Nguyen Chi et al., 2016; 

Lockmann et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2017). In humans, neuronal firing in parahippocampal cortex 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

43 

covaries with cardiac -cycle duration, and breathing coordinates hippocampal sleep oscillations, 

further supporting the idea that visceral rhythms provide a temporally relevant organizing signal for 

medial temporal circuits across vigilance states (Kim et a l., 2019; Sheriff et al., 2024). At the same 

time, the relationship is not strictly unidirectional, because hippocampal stimulation can alter heart 

rate, blood pressure, respiration, and gastric motility, indicating that hippocampus is embedded in 

reciproc al autonomic loops rather than passively entrained by them (Ruit and Neafsey, 1988; Guan 

et al., 2003). Against this background, the main advance of our dataset is the demonstration across 

multiple simultaneously monitored visceral modalities, that substan tial synchronization between 

visceral and hippocampal activities is present in wakefulness and that sleep reshapes its distribution 

across signals and neuronal subpopulations. The rarity with which neurons coupled to one visceral 

modality in one vigilance state remain coupled to that same modality in the other state argues for 

dynamic state -dependent reconfiguration of hippocampal visceral coupling, rather than a fixed class 

of “visceral” cells. Our data emphasi ses persistent body -hippocampus synchronization in both 

wakefulness and sleep, with state -dependent enhancement for selected signals emerging on top of 

this broader and functionally important organization. 

A substantial proportion of hippocampal cells in our study showed spike activity 

synchronized to either rhythmic visceral events or to pronounced arrhythmic ones. These cells could 

be modulated by both types of visceral activity (see Figs 2 and 4 for cardiorespiratory activity, and 

Fig 8 for gastrointestinal activ ity , and Figure 9 for an overview of the changes per state of 

vigilance ). All event -triggered and spike -triggered measures for these cells showed statistical 

significance rates above the 5% error threshold, ranging from 6.6% to 42.9% of cells. Most 

comparisons had over 5% of cells showing statistical significance at p<0.01. To strengthen the 

analytic rigor of the results we have applied a double approach to tackling multiple comparisons, 

introducing binomial enrichment test followed by FDR. Significant relationships between visceral 

and hippocampal signals that can be reported after this analysis for both states of vigilance are all of 

the breathing -related and stomach -related ones. Synchronization between hippocampa l cells spiking 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

44 

and duodenal SW was significant only in SWS. Duodenal SB and envelope of high -frequency 

duodenal signal only passed both the enrichment test and FDR in wakefulness . While heartbeats 

and hippocampal spiking synchronization did not pass our thresholds in either wakefulness or SWS, 

LFP synchronization was significant for both states . We therefore conclude that hippocampal 

activity is potentially linked to interoceptive signals. 

The relationships between visceral and hippocampal activities could be significant in either 

wakefulness or sleep , but the majority of hippocampal cells synchronized only in one state. This 

was evident with all types of the visceral signals we studied. However, two of the calculated types 

of STAs showed dual (i.e., in SWS and wakefulness) preferences, namely in 8.4% o f recordings 

from the stomach and in 12% of recordings of respiration. This may indicate that tracking rhythmic 

visceral events is more vigilance state -specific than tracking visceral events of a particular strength. 

However, the proportion of cells linked to these events was also the highest in our sample (23% in 

wakefulness and 42.9% in sleep for STA analysis), reflecting a potentially greater relationship 

hippocampal activity to the high amplitude visceral signals. 

We observed co -synchronization of neuronal activities to functionally related visceral signals, 

such as cardiac and respiratory events (above the diaphragm) or duodenal and gastric (below the 

diaphragm), but not to the unrelated: i.e., activities of hippoc ampal cells could be linked to 

respiration and heart beats or to stomach and duodenal activities. These co -synchronizations we 

have observed might lead to the entrained frequencies of hippocampal cell spike trains having 

components distinct from events re lated to any one visceral system. 

In line with previous research (Duffin and Hockman, 1972; Frysinger et al., 1989; Radna and 

MacLean, 1981; Poe et al., 1996; Herrero et al, 2018; Tort et al., 2018; Folschweiller and Sauer, 

2021; Nokia and Penttonen, 2022), the strongest link was observed between respiration and 

hippocampal activities, particularly during sleep, with 42.9% of cells showing significant breathing 

STAs. Hippocampal LFPs also showed the highest rates of significant responses to breathing, 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

45 

especially during high delta power episodes in SWS and wakefulness. Thus, LFPs were also 

becoming synchronized to respiration in sleep or drowsiness. 

Figure 9 . Overview of modulation of hippocampal activity during wakefulness, SWS and in both 

states. Heatmaps of percentages per state of vigilance are given for spiking activity (top 

panel) and LFPs (bottom panel). 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

46 

Hippocampus is known to be involved in respiratory control, and its stimulation can alter 

breathing patterns, including evoking apnoea (Kaada and Jasper, 1952; Duffin and Hockman, 1972; 

Lacuey et al., 2017; Lacuey et al., 2019; Limanskaya et al., 2024). Our results provide the first 

direct neural evidence for reports of hippocampal involvement in high -amplitude respiratory events 

(Poe et al., 1996; Ajayi and Mills, 2017), but particularly during sleep. This may lead to 

oversynchronization of vulnerable hippocampal circuits during SWS, potentially explaining the link 

between sleep -disordered breathing and epilepsy ( Harnod et al., 2017), as well as the induction of 

paroxysmal gamma waves in the temporal lobe by specific breathing practices (Vialatte et al., 

2009 ). However, as our study does not allow to resolve the direction of the effects and demonstrate 

whether the driver of such synchronization come s from the visceral system or the hippocampus, 

further investigation of the directionality is necessary to establish any causal relationships here. In 

addition, our experiments were conducted in healthy animals, and an appropriate epilepsy model is 

required to study whether the interoceptive signalling is the one triggering oversynchronization . It is 

also possible that two systems are both prone to synchronization at similar frequencies and can 

mutually enhance these effects. At the sam e time, one may argue that the ascending driving force is 

more likely in the case of breathing. For example, Lockmann et al. (2016) showed that a 

hippocampal respiration -coupled rhythm was abolished by tracheotomy and restored by rhythmic 

nasal air puffs , which strongly supports an ascending drive rather than the hippocampus imposing 

the rhythm on the body. Nguyen et al. (2016) further reported that the hippocampal respiration -

driven rhythm is distinct from theta and that directionality analysis is consistent with a drive from 

the olfactory bulb to hippocampus . In humans in was demonstrated that breathing organize s

hippocampal sleep oscillations, again favouring an ascending respiratory influence on hippocampal 

synchronization ( Sheriff et al., 2024 ). 

Our results show moderate synchronization of hippocampal neurons to heartbeats with none 

significantly related to heartbeats in both states. Responses to cardiac events were reported before 

(Frysinger and Harper, 1989; McEchron et al., 2000), hippocampal s timulation also changes heart 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

47 

rate and blood pressure (Kaada and Jasper, 1952; Anand and Dua, 1956), and hippocampus is 

involved in controlling heart rate in humans (Norton et al., 2013). 

High occurrence of significant heart rate STAs likely resulted from the vigilance state 

dependency of both hippocampal cell spiking and heart rate. Changes in heart rate across vigilance 

states can produce apparent state -dependent coupling even without a direct hippocampal influence, 

and emotional arousal can similarly co -modulate both variables. At the same time, human 

intracranial recordings show th at resting firing fluctuations in medial temporal and cingulate regions 

can predict cardiac -cycle duration, with analyses favouring a neural -to -cardiac direction in many 

units (Kim et al., 2019). Therefore, our data are compatible with both shared -state co -modulation 

and a potential top -down hippocampal contribution to cardiac regulation, but do not by themselves 

disambiguate these mechanisms. However, this effect might explain the value of heart rate signals 

in seizure prediction (Van Elmpt et al., 2006; Sevcencu and Struijk, 2010; Fujiwara et al., 2016; 

Stirling et al., 2021). LFP responses showed higher occurrences and overlaps between vigil ance 

states compared to cell responses; however, they demonstrated state preference as well, favouring 

episodes with either higher spindle activity or higher delta activity. 

We observed 5.9% of cells synchronizing with both breathing and heartbeats in the same state of 

vigilance. Such co -modulation can further increase the chances of modulation of hippocampal 

activity by related cardiorespiratory events. Since LFP synchronization to breathing occurred nearly 

exclusively during periods of strong delta activity, while synchronization to heartbeats happened 

during high delta or high spindle activities , it seems that both visceral inputs were also more 

effective in synchronizing hippocampal activity during sleep or microsleep episodes. 

Recent studies had uncovered a widespread brain network associated with stomach activity in 

the resting state (Rebollo et al., 2018) and substantial increase of brain responses to vagal 

(Rembado et al., 2021) and intestinal (Levichkina et al., 2021) stimul ations in SWS. Our current 

study has provided the description of hippocampal synchronization to gastrointestinal activity at the 

neuronal level. Hippocampal activity was linked to duodenal and gastric myoelectric signals. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

48 

Higher frequency duodenal signals (SB envelope) which are indicative of duodenal motility were 

linked to hippocampal activity during wakefulness, while regular duodenal SWs synchronized with 

the hippocampus more effectively during sleep. LFP analysis showe d distinct duodenal inputs to the 

hippocampus across different states of vigilance. Hippocampal sites synchronized with duodenal 

activity exclusively in either wakefulness or sleep, not both. This suggests a strict separation 

between the inputs into networ ks processing GI signals during sleep and wakefulness, similar to 

observations made for the insular cortex (Levichkina et al., 2021). 

Certain GI -related signals are related to wakefulness, while the others are likely to occur more at 

rest. For example, peak gastrointestinal mechanosensitivity (Page, 2021) and related mRNA and 

protein production (Saito et al., 2008; Voigt, Forsyth, Keshav arzian, 2019) occur during 

wakefulness and the SB component of duodenal signals are more representative of these in 

comparison to SW (Papasova and Milenov, 1965; Papasova et al., 1966; Costa and Furness, 1982; 

Sarna, 1989; Martinez -de -Juan et al., 2000). In contrast, satiety causes postprandial sleepiness in 

many species, including humans (Antin et al., 1975; Borbély, 1977; Danguir et al., 1979; Orr et al., 

1997; Wells et al., 1998; Shemyakin and Kapás, 2001; Bazar et al., 2004; Murphy et al., 2016) 

leadin g to rest or sleep. Postprandial somnolence is largely mediated by vagal signals related to 

gastric distension, food composition, and humoral influences (Hansen et al., 1998; Shemyakin & 

Kapás, 2001; Kim and Lee, 2009). 

In line with the above as well as the food transition times (Camilleri, 2019; Husnik et al., 2017; 

Telles et al., 2022), a substantial part of digestion and the highest levels of nutrient absorption occur 

during resting periods or sleep, while the higher d uodenal motility happens in awake state (Duboc et 

al., 2020). Satiety -related gastrointestinal signals also induce low -frequency EEG synchronization 

(Hansen et al., 1998). The increase in phase -amplitude coupling between MEG -measured brain 

activity and ele ctrogastrographic signal was also observed during rest (Balasubramani et al, 2022). 

Our results for duodenal signal synchronization are consistent with the known differences of GI 

activity in different states of vigilance. However, analysed SW events represent ongoing duodenal 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

49 

electrical activity; we did not manipulate feeding state, nutrient composition, or luminal delivery, so 

nutrient dependence of the observed SW and hippocampal coupling cannot be directly concluded 

from our data. We therefore treat the SW link to nutrient absorption as a hypothesis which can be 

biologically plausible because nutrient exposure in the duodenum is known to generate nutrient -

specific vagal afferent signalling and coordinated motility responses (Schwartz and Moran, 1998), 

and postprandial intesti nal SW /SB organization can be enhanced through cholinergic mechanisms, 

as shown by atropine sensitivity (Qin et al., 1999). Thus, nutrient -vagal modulation is a reasonable 

candidate mechanism for future testing, but the present results should be interpreted as evid ence for 

state -dependent SW and hippocamp us synchronization rather than direct proof of a nutrient -driven 

pathway. Previous studies suggest that gastrointestinal influences are very likely to drive 

hippocampal activity. Suarez et al. (2018) showed that selective gastrointestinal vagal 

deafferentation impairs hippocampal -dependent memory and noted that hippocampal neurons could 

be activated by direct vagus nerve stimulation and by GI vagally mediated signals such as gastric 

distension and intestinal nutrient -related input. Consistent with this ascending interpretation of the 

driver of synchronization, Wang et al. found that activation of an implantable gastric stimulator 

increased metabolism in the hippocampus in humans (Wang et al., 2006). Taken together, these 

findings support the view that at least part of the coupling between GI and hippocampal activity can 

be driven from the periphery upward, while still not excluding descending or common driver 

mechanisms, considering, e.g., that motilin injection into the hippocampus can affect gastric 

motility (Guan et al., 2003). 

8.4% of cells in our study exhibited significant STAs for both stomach activity and the 

duodenal SB envelope. Since increased stomach motility is likely associated with higher duodenal 

motility, this co -activation leading might be a common signal, which, provided that the direction of 

signalling is from the visceral system to the hippocampus, can be consistent with strong association 

between eating and seizures (Nagaraja and Chand, 1984; Tényi et al., 2021). 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

50 

Neurophysiological studies involving large animal models commonly rely on data from a pair of 

animals with multiple neurons sampled from each of them. In this approach cells are recognised as 

the units of statistics and two animals are used to avoid a situ ation when a sample gets recorded 

from an animal that is by itself an outlier. However, it is important to acknowledge that our animal 

sample size is limited to only two cats and relatively small number of locations within dorsal 

hippocampus. Although our animals demonstrated comparable results, it is quite possible that the 

reported proportions of cell activities might be clarified by using more animals and different 

recording positions along the ventro -dorsal axis of the hippocampus. Our recordings were restricted 

to the dorsal hippocampus, while ventral/anterior sectors are often considered more tightly linked to 

viscerolimbic and epilepsy -relevant circuitry (Fanselow and Dong, 2011; Strange et al., 2014). This 

creates a risk of over generalizing dorsal fi ndings to the full longitudinal axis of the hippocampus. 

However, in cats, dorsal hippocampus itself is not functionally isolated from interoceptive 

processing: classic feline work shows graded dorsal –ventral differences in firing organization and 

projecti on architecture rather than a strict binary split (Elul, 1964a,b; Siegel and Tassoni, 1971). Our 

data extend this by showing dorsal hippocampal locking to multiple visceral signals (cardiac, 

respiratory, gastric, and duodenal ) across vigilance states. At t he same time, translational 

interpretation should remain cautious because human mesial temporal epilepsy is frequently centred 

in anteromesial temporal structures, with prominent involvement of hippocampal head and 

entorhinal circuitry (Engel, 2001; Bernasconi et al., 2003; Bartolomei et al., 2005). 

Brain activity, including in the hippocampus, is more synchronized during SWS (Halgren et al., 

1978; Ferrara et al., 2012) and epileptic discharges often depend on the same mechanisms as slow -

wave activity (Beenhakker and Huguenard, 2009). While the sympat hetic system supports 

requirements of wakefulness, parasympathetic system is more active during sleep (Trinder et al., 

2001; Cabiddu et al., 2012; Fatt et al., 2020). Interoceptive inputs amplified by the parasympathetic 

system are therefore likely to be s tronger during sleep. The vagus nerve is the major source of this 

input to various regions of the brain. Hippocampus receives polysynaptic vagal input via medial 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

51 

septum (Castle et al., 2005; Suarez et al., 2018), which is ideally positioned to regulate transmission 

of interoceptive signals to the hippocampus between states of vigilance (Levichkina et al., 2025). 

Many areas receiving vagal input are also connected to the hippocampus (Kishi et al., 2000; Krout 

et al., 2002; Saper et al., 2005; Castle et al., 2005; Herman et al., 2005; Dong and Swans on, 2006; 

Cenquizca and Swanson, 2007; Petrovich et al., 2001; Fanselow and Dong, 2011). 

Both the input (LFP) and the output (neuronal spiking) signals demonstrated association with 

various visceral events. We suggest that the higher propensity for synchronization during SWS, 

coupled with sleep -linked visceral events such as breathing and SW m ay trigger paroxysmal 

activity (Levichkina et al., 2025). Conversely, desynchronized hippocampal activity during 

wakefulness may oppose such triggering. 

To summarize, all the visceral signals we studied were reflected in hippocampal activity. Sleep 

not only did not prevent this synchronization , but for respiration and periodic duodenal activity, 

increased its probability. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

52 

References 

Ali T, Choe J, Awab A, Wagener TL, Orr WC (2013) Sleep, Immunity and Inflammation in 

Gastrointestinal Disorders. World J Gastroenterol 19:9231 –9239. 

Ajayi IE, Mills PC (2017) Effects of the hippocampus on the motor expression of augmented 

breaths. PLoS ONE 12:1 –15. 

Anand BK, Dua S (1956) Circulatory and respiratory changes induced by electrical stimulation of 

limbic system (visceral brain). J Neurophysiol 19:393 –400. 

Amsel S (2024) Cat Anatomy (Thoracic and Abdominal Organs). Exploring Nature Educational 

Resource. Available at: http://www.exploringnature.org/db/view/Cat -Anatomy -Thoracic -and -

Abdominal -Organs [Accessed March 25, 2024]. 

Antin J, Gibbs J, Holt J, Young RC, Smith GP (1975) Cholecystokinin elicits the complete 

behavioral sequence of satiety in rats. J Comp Physiol Psychol 89:784 –790. 

Azevedo EP, Pomeranz L, Cheng J, Schneeberger M, Vaughan R, Stern SA, Tan B, Doerig K, 

Greengard P, Friedman JM (2019) A Role of Drd2 Hippocampal Neurons in Context -Dependent 

Food Intake. Neuron 102:873 -886.e5. 

Balasubramani PP, Walke A, Grennan G, Perley A, Purpura S, Ramanathan D, Coleman TP, Mishra 

J (2022) Simultaneous Gut -Brain Electrophysiology Shows Cognition and Satiety Specific 

Coupling. Sensors (Basel) 22:9242. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

53 

Bartolomei F, Khalil M, Wendling F, Sontheimer A, Regis J, Ranjeva JP, Guye M, Chauvel P (2005) 

Entorhinal cortex involvement in human mesial temporal lobe epilepsy: an electrophysiologic and 

volumetric study. Epilepsia 46:677 –687. 

Bazar K, Yun A, Lee P (2004) Debunking a myth: neurohormonal and vagal modulation of sleep 

centers, not redistribution of blood flow, may account for postprandial somnolence. Med 

Hypotheses 63:778 -782. 

Beenhakker MP, Huguenard JR (2009) Neurons that fire together also conspire together: is normal 

sleep circuitry hijacked to generate epilepsy? Neuron 62:612 -632. 

Bernasconi N, Bernasconi A, Caramanos Z, Reutens DC, Andermann F, Dubeau F, Arnold DL 

(2003) Mesial temporal damage in temporal lobe epilepsy: a volumetric MRI study of the 

hippocampus, amygdala and parahippocampal region. Brain 126:462 –469. 

Besedovsky L, Lange T, Born J (2012) Sleep and Immune Function. Pflugers Arch Eur J Physiol 

463:121 -137. 

Borbély A (1977) Sleep in the rat during food deprivation and subsequent restitution of food. Brain 

Res 124:457 -471. 

Brookes SJ, Spencer NJ, Costa M, Zagorodnyuk VP (2013) Extrinsic primary afferent signalling in 

the gut. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 10:286 -296. 

Cabiddu R, Cerutti S, Viardot G, Werner S, Bianchi AM (2012) Modulation of the Sympatho -Vagal 

Balance during Sleep: Frequency Domain Study of Heart Rate Variability and Respiration. Front 

Physiol 3:45. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

54 

Camilleri M (2019) Gastrointestinal hormones and regulation of gastric emptying. Curr Opin 

Endocrinol Diabetes Obes 26:3 -10. 

Canolty RT, Knight RT (2010) The functional role of cross -frequency coupling. Trends Cogn Sci 

14:506 -515. 

Cao J, Wang X, Chen J, Zhang N, Liu Z (2022) The vagus nerve mediates the stomach -brain 

coherence in rats. Neuroimage 263:119628. 

Carrera -Cañas C, Garzón M, de Andrés I (2019) The Transition Between Slow -Wave Sleep and 

REM Sleep Constitutes an Independent Sleep Stage Organized by Cholinergic Mechanisms in the 

Rostrodorsal Pontine Tegmentum. Front Neurosci 13:748. 

Castle M, Comoli E, Loewy AD (2005) Autonomic brainstem nuclei are linked to the hippocampus. 

Neuroscience 134:657 –669. 

Cenquizca LA, Swanson LW (2007) Spatial organization of direct hippocampal field CA1 axonal 

projections to the rest of the cerebral cortex. Brain Res Rev 56:1 -26. 

Chokroverty S, Nobili L (2017) Sleep and Epilepsy. In: Sleep Disorders Medicine, pp 915 –961. 

New York: Springer -Verlag. 

Combi R, Dalprà L, Tenchini ML, Ferini -Strambi L (2004) Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal 

lobe epilepsy —a critical overview. J Neurol 251:923 –934. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

55 

Costa M, Furness JB (1982) Nervous control of intestinal motility. In: Mediators and Drugs in 

Gastrointestinal Motility I. Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology (Continuation of Handbuch 

der experimentellen Pharmakologie), Vol 59 (Bertaccini J, ed), pp 279 –382. Berlin, Heidelberg: 

Springer. 

Danguir J, Nicolaidis S, Gerard H (1979) Relations between feeding and sleep patterns in the rat. J 

Comp Physiol Psychol 93:820 –830. 

Dinner DS (2002) Effect of sleep on epilepsy. J Clin Neurophysiol 19:504 –513. Duboc H, Coffin B, 

Siproudhis L (2020) Disruption of Circadian Rhythms and Gut Motility: An Overview of 

Underlying Mechanisms and Associated Pathologies. J Clin Gastroenterol 54: 405 -414. 

Dong HW, Swanson LW (2006) Projections from bed nuclei of the stria terminalis, anteromedial 

area: cerebral hemisphere integration of neuroendocrine, autonomic, and behavioral aspects of 

energy balance. J Comp Neurol 494:142 –178. 

Duffin J, Hockman CH (1972) Limbic forebrain and midbrain modulation and phase -switching of 

expiratory neurons. Brain Res 39:235 –239. 

Elul R (1964a) Regional differences in the hippocampus of the cat. I. Specific discharge patterns of 

the dorsal and ventral hippocampus and their role in generalized seizures. Electroencephalogr Clin 

Neurophysiol 16:470 –488. 

Elul R (1964b) Regional differences in the hippocampus of the cat. II. Projections of the dorsal and 

ventral hippocampus. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 16:489 –502. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

56 

Engel J Jr (2001) Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy: what have we learned? Neuroscientist 7:340 –352. 

Fanselow MS, Dong HW (2010) Are the dorsal and ventral hippocampus functionally distinct 

structures? Neuron 65:7 –19. 

Fatt SJ, Beilharz JE, Joubert M, et al (2020) Parasympathetic activity is reduced during slow -wave 

sleep, but not resting wakefulness, in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome. J Clin Sleep Med 

16:19 –28. 

Fedorov GO, Levichkina E, Limanskaya AV, Pigareva ML, Pigarev IN (2023) Assessment of a 

single trial impact on the amplitude of the averaged event related potentials. Front Neural Circuits 

17:1138774. 

Fee MS (2000) Active Stabilization of Electrodes for Intracellular Recording in Awake Behaving 

Animals. Neuron 27:461 –468. 

Ferguson AS, Nishino T, Girault JB, Hazlett HC, Schultz RT, Marrus NM, Styner M, Torres -Gomez 

S, Gerig G, Evans A, Dager SR, Estes AM, Zwaigenbaum L, Pandey J, St. John T, Piven J, Pruett 

JR Jr, Todorov AA . (2025) Statistical properties of functional connectivity MRI enrichment analysis 

in school -age autism research. Dev Cogn Neurosci 72:101534 

Ferrara M, Moroni F, De Gennaro L, Nobili L (2012) Hippocampal Sleep Features: Relations to 

Human Memory Function. Front Neurol 3:57. 

Folschweiller S, Sauer JF (2021) Respiration -Driven Brain Oscillations in Emotional Cognition. 

Front Neural Circuits 15:761812. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

57 

Frysinger RC, Harper RM (1989) Cardiac and respiratory correlations with unit discharge in human 

amygdala and hippocampus. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 72:463 –470. 

Fujiwara K, Miyajima M, Yamakawa T, Abe E, Suzuki Y, Sawada Y, Kano M, Maehara T, Ohta K, 

Sasai -Sakuma T, Inoue Y, Matsushima E (2016) Epileptic Seizure Prediction Based on Multivariate 

Statistical Process Control of Heart Rate Variability Features. IEEE T rans Biomed Eng 63:1321 –

1332. 

Garcia -Casado J, Martinez -de -Juan JL, Ponce JL (2005) Noninvasive measurement and analysis of 

intestinal myoelectrical activity using surface electrodes. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 52:983 –991. 

Garcia -Casado J, Martinez -de -Juan JL, Ponce JL (2006) Intestinal motility. In: Wiley Encyclopedia 

of Biomed Engineering. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley -InterScience. 

Garg D, Charlesworth L, Shukla G (2022) Sleep and Temporal Lobe Epilepsy - Associations, 

Mechanisms and Treatment Implications. Front Hum Neurosci 16:849899. 

Girges C, Vijiaratnam N, Wirth T, Tjoakarfa C, Idaszak J, Seneviratne U (2020) Seizures triggered 

by eating - A rare form of reflex epilepsy: A systematic review. Seizure 83:21 –31. 

Gottesmann C, Gandolfo G, Zernicki BET (1984) Intermediate stage of sleep in the cat. J Physiol 

79:365 –372. 

Guan Y, Tang M, Jiang Z, Peeters TL (2003) Excitatory effects of motilin in the hippocampus on 

gastric motility in rats. Brain Res 984:33 –41. doi:10.1016/S0006 -8993(03)03016 -6. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

58 

Hartse KM, Eisenhart SF, Bergmann BM, Rechtschaffen A (1979) Ventral hippocampus spikes 

during sleep, wakefulness, and arousal in the cat. Sleep 1:231 –246. 

Jagger A, Grahn J, Ritter RC (1997) Reduced vagal sensory innervation of the small intestinal 

myenteric plexus following capsaicin treatment of adult rats. Neurosci Lett 236:103 –106. 

Jeppesen J, Beniczky S, Fuglsang -Frederiksen A, Sidenius P, Jasemian Y (2010) Detection of 

epileptic -seizures by means of power spectrum analysis of heart rate variability: A pilot study. 

Technol Health Care 18:417 –426. 

Halgren E, Babb TL, Crandall PH (1978) Human hippocampal formation EEG desynchronizes 

during attentiveness and movement. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 44:778 –781. 

Hanif S, Musick ST (2021) Reflex Epilepsy. Aging Dis 12:1010 -1020. 

Hansen MK, Kapás L, Fang J, Krueger JM (1998) Cafeteria diet -induced sleep is blocked by 

subdiaphragmatic vagotomy in rats. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 274:R168 –R174. 

Harnod T, Wang Y -C, Lin C -L, Tseng C -H (2017) High risk of developing subsequent epilepsy in 

patients with sleep -disordered breathing. PLoS ONE 12:e0173491. 

Herman JP, Ostrander MM, Mueller NK, Figueiredo H (2005) Limbic system mechanisms of stress 

regulation: hypothalamo -pituitary -adrenocortical axis. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 

29:1201 –1213. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

59 

Herman ST, Walczak TS, Bazil CW (2001) Distribution of partial seizures during the sleep -wake 

cycle: differences by seizure onset site. Neurology 56:1453 –1459. 

Herrero JL, Khuvis S, Yeagle E, Cerf M, Mehta AD (2018) Breathing above the brainstem: 

Volitional control and attentional modulation in humans. J Neurophysiol 119:145 –159. 

Hofstra WA, de Weerd AW (2009) The circadian rhythm and its interaction with human epilepsy: a 

review of literature. Sleep Med Rev 13:413 –420. 

Husnik R, Fletcher JM, Gaschen L, Gaschen FP (2017) Validation of Ultrasonography for 

Assessment of Gastric Emptying Time in Healthy Cats by Radionuclide Scintigraphy. J Vet Intern 

Med 31:394 -401. 

Irle E, Markowitsch HJ (1982) Connections of the hippocampal formation, mamillary bodies, 

anterior thalamus and cingulate cortex. Exp Brain Res 47:79 -94. 

Kaada BR, Jasper H (1952) Respiratory responses to stimulation of temporal pole, insula, and 

hippocampal and limbic gyri in man. J Am Med Assoc Arch Neurol Psychiatry 68:609 –619. 

Karoly PJ, Stirling RE, Freestone DR, Nurse ES, Maturana MI, Halliday AJ, Neal A, Gregg NM, 

Brinkmann BH, Richardson MP, La Gerche A, Grayden DB, D'Souza W, Cook MJ (2021) Multiday 

cycles of heart rate are associated with seizure likelihood: An observation al cohort study. 

EBioMedicine 72:103619. 

Kennedy PJ, Shapiro ML (2009) Motivational states activate distinct hippocampal representations 

to guide goal -directed behaviors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106:10805 –10810. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

60 

Kim SW, Lee BI (2009) Metabolic state, neurohormones, and vagal stimulation, not increased 

serotonin, orchestrate postprandial drowsiness. Biosci Hypotheses 2:422 –427. 

Kim K, Ladenbauer J, Babo -Rebelo M, Buot A, Lehongre K, Adam C, Hasboun D, Lambrecq V, 

Navarro V, Ostojic S, Tallon -Baudry C (2019) Resting -state neural firing rate is linked to cardiac -

cycle duration in the human cingulate and parahippocampal cortices. J Neurosci 39:3676 –3686. 

https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2291 -18.2019 

Kishi T, Tsumori T, Ono K, Yokota S, Ishino H, Yasui Y (2000) Topographical organization of 

projections from the subiculum to the hypothalamus in the rat. J Comp Neurol 419:205 –222. 

Krout KE, Kawano J, Mettenleiter TC, Loewy AD (2002) CNS inputs to the suprachiasmatic 

nucleus of the rat. Neuroscience 110:73 –92. 

Kukorelli T, Juhász G (1976) Electroencephalographic synchronization induced by stimulation of 

small intestine and splanchnic nerve in cats. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 41:491 –500. 

Kukorelli T, Juhász G (1977) Sleep induced by intestinal stimulation in cats. Physiol Behav 19:355 –

358. 

Kubie JL, Muller RU (1991) Multiple representations in the hippocampus. Hippocampus 1:240 –

242. 

Lacuey N, Zonjy B, Londono L, Lhatoo SD (2017) Amygdala and hippocampus are 

symptomatogenic zones for central apneic seizures. Neurology 88:701 –705. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

61 

Lacuey N, Hampson JP, Harper RM, Miller JP (2019) Limbic and paralimbic structures driving 

ictal central apnea. Neurology 92:655 –669. 

Lathe R, Singadia S, Jordan C, Riedel G (2020) The interoceptive hippocampus: Mouse brain 

endocrine receptor expression highlights a dentate gyrus (DG) -cornu ammonis (CA) challenge -

sufficiency axis. PLoS One 15:e0227575. 

Levichkina EV, Fedorov GO, Bagaev VA, Busygina II, Pigarev IN (2006) The use of numerical 

stochastical modeling for the evaluation of efficiency of cortico -visceral interaction during sleep. J 

Sleep Res 15. 

Levichkina EV, Busygina II, Pigareva ML, Pigarev IN (2021) The Mysterious Island: Insula and Its 

Dual Function in Sleep and Wakefulness. Front Syst Neurosci 14:592660. 

Levichkina E, Pigareva ML, Limanskaya A, Pigarev IN (2022) Somatovisceral Convergence in 

Sleep -Wake Cycle: Transmitting Different Types of Information via the Same Pathway. Front Netw 

Physiol 2:840565. 

Levichkina E, Grayden DB, Petrou S, Cook MJ, Vidyasagar TR (2025) Sleep links hippocampal 

propensity for epileptiform activity to its viscerosensory inputs. Front Neurosci 19:1559529. 

Li J, Segel A, Feng X, Tu JC, Eck A, King KT, Adeyemo B, Karcher NR, Chen L, Eggebrecht AT, 

Wheelock MD. Network -level enrichment provides a framework for biological interpretation of 

machine learning results. (2024) Network Neuroscience. 8(3):762 -790. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

62 

Limanskaya A, Levichkina E, Pigarev I (2024) Hippocampal neurons change spike rates before the 

episodes of central sleep apnea (Abstract). Sleep Med 115:S20 -S21. 

Liu Y, McAfee SS, Heck DH (2017) Hippocampal sharp -wave ripples in awake mice are entrained 

by respiration. Sci Rep 7:8950. doi:10.1038/s41598 -017 -09511 -8. 

Liu HY, Yang Z, Meng FG, Guan Y, Ma Y, Liang S, Lin J, Pan L, Zhao B, Zhao M, Zhang J, Liu C, 

Zhang C, Xiao X (2018) Preoperative Heart Rate Variability as Predictors of Vagus Nerve 

Stimulation Outcome in Patients with Drug -resistant Epilepsy. Sci Rep 8:3856. 

Lockmann ALV, Laplagne DA, Leão RN, Tort ABL (2016) A respiration -coupled rhythm in the rat 

hippocampus independent of theta and slow oscillations. J Neurosci 36:5338 -5352. 

doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3452 -15.2016. 

Logothetis NK. 2002. The neural basis of the blood –oxygen –level –dependent functional magnetic 

resonance imaging signal. Phil Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 357:1003 –1037. 

Marczynski TJ, Burns LL, Marczynski GT (1980) Neuronal firing patterns in the feline 

hippocampus during sleep and wakefulness. Brain Res 185:139 –160. 

Martinez -de -Juan JL, Saiz J, Meseguer M, Ponce JL (2000) Small bowel motility: relationship 

between smooth muscle contraction and electroenterogram signal. Med Eng Phys 22:189 –199. 

McEchron MD, Tseng W, Disterhoft JF (2000) Neurotoxic lesions of the dorsal hippocampus 

disrupt auditory -cued trace heart rate (fear) conditioning in rabbits. Hippocampus 10:739 -751. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

63 

Moore JG (1991) Circadian Dynamics of Gastric Acid Secretion and Pharmacodynamics of H2 

Receptor Blockade. Ann NY Acad Sci 618:150 –158. 

Mosher CP, Wei Y, Kamiński J, Nandi A, Mamelak AN, Anastassiou CA, Rutishauser U (2020) 

Cellular Classes in the Human Brain Revealed In Vivo by Heartbeat -Related Modulation of the 

Extracellular Action Potential Waveform. Cell Rep 30:3536 –3551.e6. 

Murphy K, Deshpande S, Yurgel M, Quinn J, Weissbach J, Keene A, Dawson -Scully K, Huber R, 

Tomchik S, Ja W (2016) Postprandial sleep mechanics in Drosophila. eLife 5:e19334. 

Nazer F, Dickson CT (2009) Slow oscillation state facilitates epileptiform events in the 

hippocampus. J Neurophysiol 102:1880 -1889. 

Nagaraja D, Chand RP (1984) Eating epilepsy. Clin Neurol Neurosurg 86:95 –99. 

Nicolaidis S (2006) Metabolic mechanism of wakefulness (and hunger) and sleep (and satiety): role 

of adenosine triphosphate and hypocretin and other peptides. Metabolism 55:S24 –S29. 

Nguyen Chi V, Müller C, Wolfenstetter T, Yanovsky Y, Draguhn A, Tort ABL, Brankačk J (2016) 

Hippocampal respiration -driven rhythm distinct from theta oscillations in awake mice. J Neurosci 

36:162 -177. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2848 -15.2016. 

Noda H, Manohar S, Adey WR (1969) Spontaneous activity of cat hippocampal neurons in sleep 

and wakefulness. Exp Neurol 24:217 –231. 

Nokia MS, Penttonen M (2022) Rhythmic Memory Consolidation in the Hippocampus. Front 

Neural Circuits 16:885684. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

64 

Norton KN, Luchyshyn TA, Kevin Shoemaker J (2013) Evidence for a medial prefrontal cortex –

hippocampal axis associated with heart rate control in conscious humans. Brain Res 1538:104 –115. 

Okudan ZV, Ozkara C (2018) Reflex epilepsy: triggers and management strategies. Neuropsychiatr 

Dis Treat 14:327 –337. 

Orr W, Shadid G, Harnish M, Elsenbruch S (1997) Meal Composition and Its Effect on Postprandial 

Sleepiness. Physiol Behav 62:709 -712. 

Papasova M, Boev K, Milenov K, Atanasova E (1966) Dependence between the appearance of 

spike -potentials in the electrogastrogram and the intensity of the contraction wave of the gastric 

wall. C R Acad Bulg Sci 19:241 –250. 

Papasova M, Milenov K (1965) Method for biopotential recordings from stomach muscles of cats 

with chronically implanted electrodes. Izv Na Inst po Phisiol BAN 9:187 –195. 

Pedreira C, Martinez J, Ison MJ, Quian Quiroga R (2012) How many neurons can we see with 

current spike sorting algorithms? J Neurosci Methods 211:58 -65. 

Petrovich GD, Canteras NS, Swanson LW (2001) Combinatorial amygdalar inputs to hippocampal 

domains and hypothalamic behavior systems. Brain Res Brain Res Rev 38:247 –289. 

Pigarev IN (1994) Neurons of visual cortex respond to visceral stimulation during slow wave sleep. 

Neuroscience 62:1237 –1243. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

65 

Pigarev IN, Saalmann YB, Vidyasagar TR (2009) A minimally invasive and reversible system for 

chronic recordings from multiple brain sites in macaque monkeys. J Neurosci Methods 181:151 –

158. 

Pigarev IN, Bagaev VA, Levichkina EV, Fedorov GO, Busigina II (2013) Cortical visual areas 

process intestinal information during slow -wave sleep. Neurogastroenterol Motil 25:268 –275. 

Pavlova MK, Shea SA, Bromfield EB (2004) Day/night patterns of focal seizures. Epilepsy Behav 

5:44 –49. 

Poe GR, Kristensen MP, Rector DM, Harper RM (1996) Hippocampal activity during transient 

respiratory events in the freely behaving cat. Neuroscience 72:39 –48. 

Preston AR, Eichenbaum H (2013) Interplay of Hippocampus and Prefrontal Cortex in Memory. 

Curr Biol 23:R764 –R773. 

Qin X -Y, Pilot M -A, Thompson H -H (1999) Postprandial changes in jejunal electric activity and 

propagation in the dog: dependence on cholinergic pathways. Neurogastroenterol Motil 11:277 –

284. 

Radna RJ, MacLean PD (1981) Vagal elicitation of respiratory -type and other unit responses in 

basal limbic structures of squirrel monkeys. Brain Res 213:45 –61. 

Raichle ME, Mintun MA. 2006. Brain work and brain imaging. Annu Rev Neurosci. 29:449 –476. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

66 

Rebollo I, Devauchelle AD, Béranger B, Tallon -Baudry C (2018) Stomach -brain synchrony reveals 

a novel, delayed -connectivity resting -state network in humans. eLife 7:e33321. 

Rembado I, Song W, Su DK, et al. (2021) Cortical Responses to Vagus Nerve Stimulation Are 

Modulated by Brain State in Nonhuman Primates. Cereb Cortex 31:5289 –5307. 

Ruit KG, Neafsey EJ (1988) Cardiovascular and respiratory responses to electrical and chemical 

stimulation of the hippocampus in anesthetized and awake rats. Brain Res 457:310 –321. 

doi:10.1016/0006 -8993(88)90701 -9. 

Saito H, Terada T, Shimakura J, Katsura T, Inui K (2008) Regulatory mechanism governing the 

diurnal rhythm of intestinal H+/peptide cotransporter 1 (PEPT1). Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver 

Physiol 295:G395 –G402. 

Salzmann E, Creutzfeldt OD, Vidyasagar TR (1993) Functional comparison of neuronal properties 

in the primate posterior hippocampus and parahippocampus (area TF/TH) during different 

behavioural paradigms involving memory and selective attention, Behav. Brain Res., 53:133 -149. 

Salameh, Bitzenhofer, Hanganu -Opatz, Dutschmann, Egger (2024) Blood pressure pulsations 

modulate central neuronal activity via mechanosensitive ion channels. Science. 

Saper CB, Scammell TE, Lu J (2005) Hypothalamic regulation of sleep and circadian rhythms. 

Nature 437:1257 –1263. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

67 

Sarna SK (1989) In vivo myoelectric activity: methods, analysis, and interpretation. In: Handbook 

of Physiology, The gastrointestinal system, Motility and Circulation (Schultz SG, Wood JD, eds), pp 

817 –834. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Sevcencu C, Struijk JJ (2010) Autonomic alterations and cardiac changes in epilepsy. Epilepsia 

51:725 -737. 

Shemyakin A, Kapás L (2001) L -364,718, a cholecystokinin -A receptor antagonist, suppresses 

feeding -induced sleep in rats. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 280:R1420 -R1426. 

Siegel A, Tassoni JP (1971) Differential efferent projections from the ventral and dorsal 

hippocampus of the cat. Brain Behav Evol 4:185 –200. 

Shouse MN, da Silva AM, Sammaritano M (1996) Circadian rhythm, sleep, and epilepsy. J Clin 

Neurophysiol 13:32 –50. 

Sheriff A, Zhou G, Sagar V, Morgenthaler JB, Cyr C, Hauner KK, Omidbeigi M, Rosenow JM, 

Schuele SU, Lane G, Zelano C (2024) Breathing orchestrates synchronization of sleep oscillations 

in the human hippocampus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 121:e2405395121. 

doi :10.1073/pnas.2405395121. 

Strange BA, Witter MP, Lein ES, Moser EI (2014) Functional organization of the hippocampal 

longitudinal axis. Nat Rev Neurosci 15:655 –669. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

68 

Stirling RE, Grayden DB, D'Souza W, Cook MJ, Nurse E, Freestone DR, Payne DE, Brinkmann 

BH, Pal Attia T, Viana PF, Richardson MP, Karoly PJ (2021) Forecasting Seizure Likelihood With 

Wearable Technology. Front Neurol 12:704060. 

Strzelecka J, Mazurkiewicz DW, Skadorwa T, Gąsior JS, Jóźwiak S (2022) Photo -Dependent Reflex 

Seizures —A Scoping Review with Proposal of Classification. J Clin Med 11:3766. 

Suarez AN, Hsu TM, Liu CM, Noble EE, Cortella AM, Nakamoto EM, Hahn JD, de Lartigue G, 

Kanoski SE (2018) Gut vagal sensory signalling regulates hippocampus function through multi -

order pathways. Nat Commun 9:2181. 

Schwartz GJ, Moran TH (1998) Duodenal nutrient exposure elicits nutrient -specific gut motility 

and vagal afferent signals in rat. Am J Physiol 274:R1236 –R1242.” 

Telles NJ, Simon BT, Scallan EM, Gould EN, Papich MG, He Y, Lee MT, Lidbury JA, Steiner JM, 

Kathrani A, Katherine Tolbert M (2022) Evaluation of gastrointestinal transit times and pH in 

healthy cats using a continuous pH monitoring system. J Feline Med Sur g 24:954 -961. 

Tényi D, Janszky J, Jeges S, et al. (2021) Food intake precipitates seizures in temporal lobe 

epilepsy. Sci Rep 11:16515. 

Tort ABL, Brankačk J, Draguhn A (2018) Respiration -Entrained Brain Rhythms Are Global but 

Often Overlooked. Trends Neurosci 41:186 –197. 

Trinder J, Kleiman J, Carrington M, et al. (2001) Autonomic activity during human sleep as a 

function of time and sleep stage. J Sleep Res 10:253 –264. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

69 

Van Elmpt WJC, Nijsen TME, Griep PAM, Arends JBAM (2006) A model of heart rate changes to 

detect seizures in severe epilepsy. Seizure 15:366 –375. 

Vialatte FB, Bakardjian H, Prasad R, Cichocki A (2009) EEG paroxysmal gamma waves during 

Bhramari Pranayama: a yoga breathing technique. Conscious Cogn 18:977 –988. 

Vidyasagar TR, Salzmann E, Creutzfeldt OD (1991) Unit activity in the hippocampus and the 

parahippocampal temporobasal association cortex related to memory and complex behaviour in the 

awake monkey. Brain Res 544:269 –278. 

Voigt RM, Forsyth CB, Keshavarzian A (2019) Circadian rhythms: a regulator of gastrointestinal 

health and dysfunction. Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 13:411 -424. 

Wang GJ, Yang J, Volkow ND, Telang F, Ma Y, Zhu W, Wong CT, Tomasi D, Thanos PK, Fowler JS 

(2006) Gastric stimulation in obese subjects activates the hippocampus and other regions involved 

in brain reward circuitry. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103:15641 -15645 .

doi:10.1073/pnas.0601977103. 

Weinstein SM, Vandekar SN, Li B, Alexander -Bloch AF, Raznahan A, Li M, Gur RE, Gur RC, 

Roalf DR, Park MTM, Chakravarty M, Baller EB, Linn KA, Satterthwaite TD, Shinohara RT. 

(2024) Network enrichment significance testing in brain -phenotype association studies. Hum Brain 

Mapp. 45(8):e26714. doi: 10.1002/hbm.26714. 

Wells AS, Read NW, Idzikowski C, Jones J (1998) Effects of meals on objective and subjective 

measures of daytime sleepiness. J Appl Physiol 84:507 –515. 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.28.721215 doi: bioRxiv preprint

70 

Xue S, Valdez DT, Tremblay L, Collman PI, Diamant NE (1995) Electrical slow wave activity of 

the cat stomach: its frequency gradient and the effect of indomethacin. Neurogastroenterol Motil 

7:157 –167. doi:10.1111/j.1365 -2982.1995.tb00221.x 

Zimmermann M (1987) Ethical principles for maintenance and use of animals in neuroscience 

research. Neurosci Lett 73:1.