Title: Frequency-specific theta states in the hippocampus are linked to reconfiguration of population activity with respect to behavioural context

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908v2.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 34

Markdown Content:
1

# Frequency -specific theta states in the hippocampus are linked to 

# reconfiguration of population activity with respect to behavioural 

# context 

Laura Masaracchia 1, Pablo Oyarzo 1, Felipe Fredes 2 and Diego Vidaurre 1,3 

5

1. Center of Functionally Integrative Neuroscience (CFIN), Department of Clinical Medicine, 

Aarhus University, Aa rhus, 8000, Denmark 

2. Dandrite, Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, 8000, Denmark 

3. Oxford Centre for Human Brain Activity (OHBA), Department of Psychiatry, Oxford 10 

University, Oxford, OX3 7JX, United Kingdom 

Corresponding Authors: 

• Laura Masaracchia,  laura.masaracchia@gmail.com , laurama@cfin.au.dk . +45 

91943406. Aarhus University, Universitetsbyen 3, 8000, Aarhus, Denmark. 15 

• Diego Vidaurre , dvidaurre@cfin.au.dk . +45 22146998. Aarhus University, 

Universitetsbyen 3, 8000, Aarhus, Denmark. 

Abstract 20 

Neural activity reflects both external stimuli and the brain's internal state, which shapes how 

information is processed and perceived. An example of modulation of neural responses by 

network states is phase -precession in the hippocampus, where the phase o f theta oscillations 

affects the firing of single neurons (place cells) and its relation to the external world. Here, we 25 

examine a different form of relationship between oscillations and neural activity, where 

frequency and power of the oscillation, instead of phase, are associated with differential neural 

firing patterns at the population level. We refer to this as ensemble pattern reconfiguration . To 

study this effect, we use electrophysiological recordings of rats performing an odour -memory 

(non -spatial) task. Using a data -driven model, we identified two distinct theta states: low -30 

power -lower -theta (LPLT) and high -power -higher -theta (HPHT). Through regression and 

decoding analyses, we found that these states are associated to modulations in hippocampal 

neural ensemble activity representing trial outcome - though the effect did not consistently 

reach statistical significance in all our s ubject s. Our findings suggest that power and frequency 

variations within theta oscillations may be linked to the reconfiguration of neural firing at the 35 

network level, motivating further investigation in larger datasets. 

Introduction 

40 

Even without being engaged in a task, an animal’s brain activity is in perpetual motion to shape 

its cognitive and physiological state 1,2 . Any sensory stimulus coming from the external world 

is then met with an ever -changing landscape of neural activity, which inevitably influences the 

way a stimulus is processed and perceived 3–5. This means that even identical stimuli are 

processed differently, depending on the current brain state 6–13 ; and that brain states affect 45 

information processing at the neural level 14 –20 .

At the regional (mesoscopic) level, network states can be identified with oscillatory patterns in 

the local field potential (LFP) signal , often associated with cognitive and physiological 

functions 21 -27 . Although the LFP signal is typically attributed to synaptic activity, neural firing 50 

can affect these oscillations 28 . In turn, these extracellular membrane fluctuations affect firing 

activity of the local neurons, through ephaptic effects 29 , influencing cognition , and suggesting 

that the LFP oscillatory patterns may reflect a functional purpose 30,31 . Existing literature 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2

targeting the relation between oscillations and neural firing has traditionally focused on the 

modulation of neural firing rate by the phase and amplitude of oscillations, across animals ,55 

brain regions, frequency bands and tasks 32 -38 . Although amplitude and frequency of 

oscillations are known to be related 39 , less focus has been devoted to the link between 

frequency of oscillations and neuronal firing 40 -42 . Existing work in this regard investigated 

fluctuations in peak frequency of oscillations and their effect in modulating neural excitability 

> 43

.60 

An example of oscillatory patterns associated to cognitive functions is theta oscillations in the 

hippocampus, studied within memory formation and recall, and spatial navigation 21,2 6,27, 44 -47.

A well -established example of oscillation -to -neuron modulation is given by the phase 

precession phenomenon, where hippocampal place cells fire at specific phases of theta 65 

oscillations, depending on an animal’s location in space 48 .

In this study we explore a kind of relationship between oscillations and neuron activity in the 

hippocampus, where variations in frequency and amplitude of theta oscillations (here 

associated with distinct states) are linked to differential representations of behavioural 70 

information (here whether the trial was performed successfully or not) at the neural population 

level, in rats performing an odour -memory, non -spatial task. To do so, we use a combination 

of data -driven methods for state detection and decoding analysis to link the detected states to 

neural activity patterns. First, we find two distinct states within the classically defined theta 

band: low -power -lower -theta (LPLT) and high -power -higher -theta (HPHT). Then, we quantify 75 

the difference in the neural ensemble patterns reflective of trial outcome between the two theta 

states, through prediction and decoding analyses. Our results suggest a tendency for neural 

population activity to differentially represent success and failure depending on which theta 

state is active. This suggests that the hippocampus may use different network configurations 

to perform different functi ons with the same neural population. Of note, our analyses do not 80 

necessarily establish a causal link from the LFP to the spikes (or the other way around), but 

an effect across scales (meso -scale in the LFP signal and microscale in the neural spikes). 

Results 85 

In this study , we quantified the relation between mesoscale network states ( represented as 

oscillat ory patterns ) and how neur al firing patterns relate to behaviour. For this, w e used 

pre viously recorded local field potential s (LFP) and spike data from the dorsal CA1 region of 

the hippocampus of four rats performing an odo ur-memory , non -spatial task 49,50 . The task 90 

required rats to recogni se whether presented odo urs followed the correct order within a 

previously learned sequence. Correct responses were rewarded with water after each odo ur

presentation . We have introduced Figure 1 to schematically visualize our method pipeline, 

that we summarize below. This is meant as a reference to aid the understanding of the method, 

rather than as a figure reporting results. We investigated whether the CA1 neural population 95 

reflected differently trial outcome depending on the local network state (Figure 1A ). For 

simplicity, we limit ed our analysis to two states, without placing a strong interpretation on this 

number (also, see Methods about practical considerations in the choice of the number of 

states). We fitted hidden Markov model s (HMM 51 -53 , a data -driven method) to detect the 

hippocampal states from the LFP data . The HMM assigned a state to each time point . We 100 

then linked these states activations to the corresponding time points in the spike data (Figure 

1B ).  With this information, we performed two different analyses: neuron -state interaction 

analys is, quantifying the effect of the interaction between the oscillatory states and neural 

activity in predicting trial outcome (Figure 1C ); and state -conditioned decoding analysis, 

quantifying the difference in neural population patterns representing success vs failure 105 

between states ( Figure 1D ). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

Figure 1: Schematic illustration of the hypothesis and methods A. Population representations and network 

states. Neural population representation of an input depend s on the state of the network in which the neurons 

are embedded. Here we show a visual example of our underlying hypothesis: dorsal CA1 neurons’ response 

to an input (for example, reward after a successful trial) varies with the network configuration (e.g., state A or 

B) . Network activity is here represented by the LFP signal . B. Finding network states: an HMM with K=2 states 

is run on the continuous LFP data ( z; top row). The HMM assigns a state to each point of the LFP data (state 

time courses , G, with the signal in middle row). The state time courses are overlied on the neural activity ( spike 

density, X), associating the activity of the neural population at each time point to a state. All the data are then 

epoched into trials. C. Schematic of the neuron -state interaction analysis : we predict trial outcome (Y) from 

three predictors: neural activity deconfounded for motion (Xd), state activation ( G) and the neuron -state 

interaction ( the product of deconfounded neural activity and state activation , Xd*G ), per neuron and per time 

point. The states contribution is quantified by means of permutation testing, comparing the prediction error of 

this model with another using random states ( G’; 10,000 random permutations). D. Schematic of state -

conditioned decoding: for each time point, trials of deconfounded neural activity (Xd) are grouped into two sets, 

depending on the state activation at that time point (e.g., state A or B) . Then, a decoder is used to predict trial 

outcome (Y) from each state -related set of trials (and for each time point), independently, in a custom train -

test , class -balanced decoding procedure . We perform two measures, a within -state prediction ( from a decoder 

trained and tested on the same state), and a cross -state prediction ( from a decoder trained on one state and 

tested on the other). These two measures are then compared to the analogous analysis performed on randomly 

assigned states, with 10,000 random permutations. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

Low -power -lower -theta (LPLT) and high -power -higher -theta (HPHT) hippocampal 

states 110 

Instead of prespecifying the definition of  network  states  in terms , for example , of frequency 

bands , here we used a data -driven, unsupervised model (the HMM 53 ) to detect states 

according to the LFP’s spectral features 54 . The states time courses output by the HMM are a 

time -point -by -time -point binary classification of the continuous data into two different groups 115 

(states), where each group reflects differences in frequency and power within the data.  The 

HMM, run on the continuous broadband LFP data (Figure 2A ), identified one state with low 

power and a major peak in the lower theta (7 -8 Hz) frequency band (LPLT) , and another with 

high power (1.2 to 3 times higher than that of LPLT) and a major peak in the higher theta (8 -9

Hz; HPHT) . As the HMM was run on the broadband signal, the states’ power spectra 120 

comprised multiple frequency bands. We visualized the ratio between the two states’ power 

spectra (Supplementary Figure 1) to check for proportional differences in the power 

spectrum across the broadband frequency range and confirmed that the largest difference 

between the two states was within the theta frequency range, consistently across all subjects. 

Figure 2B shows the states’ power spectra . We then compared statistically power and 125 

frequency across states, finding significant differences in both power and frequency 

distributions in three out of four subjects ( Supplementary Figure 2). 

As a sanity check, we tested the sensitivity of the HMM to small spectral changes . To do so, 

we run the HMM on simulated brain data, varying only in frequency between 7 to 9 Hz. The 130 

model successfully distinguished two states based on these small frequency differences 

(Supplementary Figure 3). 

Figure 2C shows the states lifetime (LT, the average duration the state activation s) and 

fractional occupancy (FO, defined as the proportion of time that a state was active in total ).135 

Both temporal (e.g., most states activations lasting between 0. 1 and 0. 8 seconds) and spectral 

(e.g. the theta dominance) features suggest that neither of the two states represents a motion 

artefact . To investigate whether the states were linked to different phase s of theta , we 

computed the frequency of their activation. If th e states switched with a frequency between 7

and 9 Hz , they could have been linked to the phase of the oscillation. We found that the states 140 

reoccurred predominantly with a frequency of 0. 1 to 1.2 Hz , indicating no direct link to the 

Figure 2: Characterisation of the HMM states. A. Example of HMM states with signal . An example of the HMM 

state assignment of the LFP data, for one subject . B. States Power Spectr a. Frequency and power content of 

the two state s for each subject (transparent lines , different linestyles per subject ). The HMM consistently finds a 

high -power, higher theta (HPHT, red) and low -power, lower theta (LPLT, yellow) state across subjects , even if 

run independently for each subject . Here reported also each state mean across the four subjects (thick darker 

lines) . C. States lifetime (LT) and fractional occupancy (FO) . The lines show the length in seconds of each state 

occurrence, per state and per subject (transparent lines) . HPHT and LPLT have similar lifetime distributions, with 

LPLT states typically being active slightly longer (yellow distribution is lower and peaking more right than red 

distribution). Also shown the mean lifetime across all subjects (thick darker lines). T he box plot shows f ractional 

occupancy (FO) , the proportion of time of activation of each state , across subjects . LPLT is typically active around 

60% of the time, HPHT, around 40%. D. Frequency of states activation . Shown for each subject how often there 

is a state switch (gray lines). Most state switches occur with a frequency below 2Hz, meaning at most two 

switches per second. Also shown the average across four subjects (black thick line). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

theta phase (Figure 2D ). To explicitly test the link between states and theta phase, we 

statistically compared the distributions of theta phases between the two states (see Methods 

for more details). Our analysis revealed that the two states did not have a significantly different 

distribution over theta phase in two out of four subjects (Subjects 1 and 4, where the difference 145 

in mean value of the states’ phase distributions was below 0.01 π, and the difference in 

variance below 0.005 π; the p -value of the Watson U 2 test,  corrected for multiple comparison 

with Benjamini -Hochberg method, was not significant), and small but significantly different 

theta phase distributions in the other two subjects (Subjects 2 and 3, with a difference in mean 

value of the distributions of 0.04 π and 0.06 π respectively, and difference in variance of 0.03 150 

π; p -value of the Watson U 2 test, corrected for multiple comparisons with Benjamini -Hochberg 

method, was <0.0001). For visualization purposes, we show the states’ FO across theta phase 

bins in Supplementary Figure 4 . Overall, these results indicate that the states are not clearly 

related to the phase of theta, suggesting they are a different effect from phase precession. 

Supplementary Figure 5 shows the HMM states characterisation (i.e., the information 155 

reported in Figure 2 ) for each individual animal .

To test whether the HMM states could be influenced by potential shape changes in the data 

(as seen in hippocampal theta literature 55 ), we run the HMM on simulated data, varying both 

in shape and frequency. Our results show that the HMM states would be mainly driven by 160 

cycle -average frequency changes in a case where the signal changed both in shape and 

cycle -average frequency, independently ( Supplementary Figure 6 ). 

To check for spikes bleeding into the LFP that could potentially affect the analysis 56 -58 , we 

performed a sanity check where we used a sharp low -pass filter at 100 Hz (see Methods for 165 

more details) to remove the potential effect of spike waveforms on the LFP 59 . We then run 

the HMM on the low -pass filtered data and confirmed that the states’ power spectra remained 

identical to those from the minimally preprocessed data. We compared the HMMs by 

computing the correlation across the whole recordings between the sta te time courses 

obtained from the minimally preprocessed data and those obtained from the low -pass filtered 170 

data, across 10 independent HMM runs. We report the correlations, consistently between 0.85 

and 0.9 across subjects, in Supplementary Figure 7 , together with two visual examples of 

the two correlated state time courses, for different correlation measures. The high correlation 

values suggested that spike contamination effect did not affect our analyses. We later 

confirmed this by running the deco ding analyses on the low -passed filtered data and 175 

comparing with the results on the minimally preprocessed signal. 

To investigate whether the state activations indexed the activation of distinct neural 

subpopulations , we inspected the average firing rate of each neuron during both state s. Ma ny 

neurons showed significant differences in firing rate  between the two states,  with the HPHT 180 

state g enerally associated with higher  firing rate s. However, most neurons were active during 

both states (Supplementary Figure 8).  To further clarify the relation between firing neurons 

and state activation, we tried to predict the state activation from the neural activity . We refer 

to neural p opulation activity as the firing density of all the neurons recorded for each animal, 

across the duration of a trial, for all the trials performed. Firing density was computed from the 185 

binary spike data by means of a Gaussian kernel (see Methods for more details). To be able 

to assess if there is an effect above and beyond the average neural firing rate, we standardised 

the signal across neurons, for each trial and time point, such that regardless of which state is 

active the gross amount of firing is the same for all trials . The prediction accuracy for the 

state ’s activation was generally close to chance level ( Supplementary Figure 9), indicating 190 

that there is no clear correspondence between an active state and a specific subpopulation of 

neurons. 

To explore whether the states were related to experimental variables , we examined the ir 

temporal distribution relative to trial outcomes (success vs. failure). We found that the states 195 

partially reflected trial outcome, with LPLT state being (in three out of four rats) the most active 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

after response for successful trials. For the failed trials, however, each state w as on average 

active for half of the trials (Supplementary Figure 10). We also examined the states 

distributions in relation to relevant task moments, such as odo ur sampling, response and inter -

trial periods . We found consistent patterns of the states’ occurrences in the various moments 200 

across subjects , i.e. the LPLT state is the most active during all task -relevant moments, and 

the distribution of the states is constant during the intertrial time (Supplementary Figure 11 ).

To summarize, our data -driven detected network states showed consistent characteristics 

across animals , with out a one -to -one correspondence between states and behavioural 205 

outcome —although the LPLT state was generally the most active during rewarded trials .

While the HPHT state typically involv ed higher firing rate from all neuron s, our analyses 

suggested that the states might not necessarily index distinct subpopulations of neurons. 

Movement does not solely explain state differences or the neural representation of trial 210 

outcome 

As the experiment involved freely moving animals required to run to the opposite end of the 

track approximately every fourth trial 49, 50 , we explicitly tested whether the HMM states and 

neural representations of trial outcome could be explained by movement. We hence computed 215 

the mean and standard deviation of the subjects’ position per state visit across states. The 

two states did not significantly differ in mean Xp or Yp (the coordinates of the animals along 

the long and short axis of the track, respectively), but did differ in the standard deviation of Xp 

and Yp, in three out of four subjects, suggesting that HPHT state visits encompassed a wider 

range of positions without movement being the primary driver of state assignment ( Table 1 ). 220 

Mean X p Std X p Mean Y p Std Y p

LPLT  HPHT  LPLT  HPHT  LPLT  HPHT  LPLT  HPHT 

Subj 1  339.06  338.54  5.13  11.21  252.55  252.36  2.79  3.45 

Subj 2  309.82  309.57  5.02  8.42  260.64  261.21  3.80  4.05 

Subj 3  451.23  451.25  3.84  4.78  270.81  270.84  2.21  3.16 

Subj 4  532.42  532.43  3.48  6.91  272.29  272.30  2.48  3.24 

After checking for locomotion potentially leaking into trial data (see Methods ), we discarded 

13, 2, 18, and 2 trials for subjects 1, 2, 3, and 4 respectively. To test how much movement 

would explain trial outcome, we u sed linear classification to predict success and failure from 

Xp and Yp head position. Head position predicted trial outcome above chance level particularly 225 

1–2 seconds after response - consistent with reward -related behaviour (licking) in successful 

trials (Supplementary Figure 12 ). To assess how much of the neural signal could be 

attributed to head motion, we regressed out Xp and Yp position from the spike density data. 

Decoding accuracy from motion -deconfounded neural activity was slightly reduced relative to 

the original data (i.e., neural activity not deconfounded for motion) , but remained above 230 

chance level after response, indicating that head motion is a contributing factor but not the 

sole driver of the neural signal (Supplementary Figure 13 ) in representing trial outcome . For 

comparison, decoding accuracy from shuffled neural activity was instead at chance level.   

> Table 1: Characterisation of the states by motion .Average values of the distributions of mean and standard
> deviation of Xp and Yp coordinates per state visit, and highlighted in green where the distributions are
> significantly different per Mann -Whitney U test (p<0.0001). The standard deviation distributio ns on both Xp and
> Yp coordinates are significant in three out of four subjects, implying the HPHT state covers a wider range of
> positions on average per state visit.
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7

Theta states reflect neural activity reconfiguration with respect to behaviour 235 

Our tests on the states, movement and neural activity with respect to trial outcome unveiled a 

complex picture, where the states are linked to trial outcome and movement, but these are not 

the only drivers of the states assignment. We then asked whether success and failure are 

re presented differently by the neural population activity depending on the theta state . To 240 

address th is question , w e investigated whether the two theta network states influenced how 

the neural population reflected trial success or failure (i.e. trial outcome ). Trial outcome may 

be associated to different cognitive processes, like attention al (which influences the choosing 

of the correct answer ), or emotional (following reward ). As before, and f or all our subsequent 

prediction and decoding analyses, the neural population activity across neurons was 245 

standardised for each trial and time point - such that regardless of which state is active the 

gross amount of firing is the same for all trials - and deconfounded for motion (i.e.  Xp and Yp 

position were regressed out from the spike density data). 

We used linear regression to predict , one neuron at a time, trial outcome from three factors: 250 

the deconfounded neural activity , the states activation and their interaction ( the product 

between deconfounded neural activity and state s activation , which is one additional 

regressor ). A schematic of this analysis is in Figure 1 C. Figure 3A shows the effect size of 

including theta states in the prediction of trial outcome from neural activity (plotted the 

prediction error averaged across neurons , using the HMM states and randomly sampled states 255 

Figure 3: A. Trial outcome prediction error . The plots show, for each subject, the prediction error of trial 

outcome. The regression analysis was performed per neuron and per time point, including the original HMM 

states (blue), and then, for comparison, including surrogate states (cyan, 10,000 ran dom permutations). We 

show the mean absolute error (MAE) of the regression, averaged across neurons (and across permutations). 

B. Significance of the states’ contribution to the prediction of trial outcome . P -value of permutation testing 

analysis, showing how significantly lower is the regression error predicting trial outcome from neural activity, 

HMM states and their interaction, with respect to randomly assigned states (10,000 permutations). We show 

the uncorrected p -values (top panel) and spatial -temporal cluster -based corrected (bottom panel), where only 

the significant clusters with p<0.01 are shown. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

for comparison ). Including the theta states in the regression analysis significantly improve d

trial outcome prediction , reducing the absolute mean error by 10% to 20% in the time points 

after response (suggesting a link between the LFP spectral properties and reward , instead of 

attention) , with respect to the random ly sampled states . Figure 3B shows statistical 

significance for each neuron, assessed using permutation testing with 10 ,000 random 260 

permutations (p -value s corrected for multiple comparisons across time series with the cluster -

based spatial -temporal test, see Methods ).  Th ese plots indicate the contribution of state -

related regressors (i.e., state activation and state -neuron interaction) to prediction of trial 

outcome, meaning whethe r state s information improves prediction of success vs failure from 

neural activity. The plots show that t he states ’ contributions are relatively consisten t across 265 

neurons (the clusters of significant time points across neurons ). This could hint at state effect s

manifesting at the level of the whole neural ensemble .

To summarize, our interaction analysis showed that accounting for the theta states improves 

the prediction of trial outcome from neural activity , meaning that the two theta network states 270 

reflect changes in how single neurons in a population fire in response to trial outcome ,

suggesting population -level effects .

Modulations in mesoscale network activity relate to behaviourally -relevant changes in 

microscale network activity 275 

Our neuron -state interaction analysis showed that including information on the two network 

states significantly improved the prediction of trial outcome . We then asked whether the 

difference between the multivariate patterns of population activity associated with the 

representation of success and failure is constant across network states . We quantif ied this 280 

difference by using multivariate regression on all neurons at once .

To achieve this, we developed a decoding method that we called state -conditioned decoding ,

where we used the HMM states time courses to separate, per time point, the neural activity 

into two sets based on the currently active state from the LFP. This separated the trials into 285 

two non -overlapping sets per time point, which we then used to decode trial outcome . We 

quantified differences in population activity patterns between the two states by comparing the 

decoding accuracy of models trained and tested within the same state (within -state) to that of 

models trained on one state and tested on the other (cross -st ate). Figure 1D shows a 

schematic of this analysis. Our reasoning was that if the two HMM states induced different 290 

neural activity patterns, the cross -state decoding would perform worse than within -state. The 

algorithm enforc es that the two per -state decoders use the same number of trials and are 

balanced in predictive class at each time point (see Methods ). Of note, we performed the 

decoding analysis on three out of four rats, as in one of them (Subject 4) the number of failed 

trials was too low to reliably perform state -conditioned decoding. We noted that within -state 295 

decoding accuracy was higher than cross -state decoding for some time points after response 

in two out of three animals. This difference remained statistically significant after permutation 

testing (10,000 permutations, cluster -based corrected; see Methods ) in only one animal . We 

therefore report decoding accuracies together with their 95% confidence intervals in Figure 

4A. The trend in one out of three animals supports the interpretation that the two HMM states 300 

are associated with partially distinct patterns of neural population activity with respect to trial 

outcome.  We visualized each individual state’s accuracy, and standard accuracy ( standard 

accuracy being the prediction accuracy when decoding from all the trials used in the states 

decoding), in Figure 4B . As observed, the accuracy changes between states and across time. 

Of note, no one state constantly holds the highest decoding accuracy across time: if one state 305 

was always the worst performing, we could reasonably consider whether the states reflect ed 

signal to noise ratio distinctions . The fact that the highest decoding accuracy alternates among 

states across time suggests that the states capture different patterns that become relevant at 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

different time points for the processing of trial outcome. To visually explore the states 

contributions , we plot the absolute difference in decoders weights in Figure 4C : the plot shows 310 

that the main differences in the decoders occur for some specific neurons across time and are 

more pronounced when within -state accuracy is higher than cross -state accuracy (which is 

also when the two states accuracies differ the most ). This plot is only intended as a 

visualization tool and should be interpreted carefully given that significance was reached in 

only one out of three subjects. 315 

We visualized the population activity patterns for successful vs failed trials (average across 

trials) under each state, and showed the absolute difference of these patterns across states 

(Supplementary Figure 14 ). This plot is intended to complement the visualization of the 

described effect , that we termed ensemble pattern reconfiguration , suggesting that the 320 

representation of success vs failure by the entire neural population changes across states. 

As a sanity check, we also performed state -conditioned decoding on the HMM states ran on 

the low -pass filtered LFP signal (see above), confirming that potential spike contamination did 

not interfere with ensemble pattern reconfiguration effect. We report t hese decoding results in 325 

Supplementary Figure 1 5, not qualitatively different from the decoding results obtained from 

the broadband states (reported in Figure 4 ). 

To summarise, our state -conditioned decoding analysis allowed us to investigate the activity 

of the neural population per state,  so that we could ask whether the neural population 330 

differently represent ed success and failure under the different states . While our results did not 

reach significance on all the subjects per our permutation testing approach, the effect we found 

hints at a differential representation of trial outcome for some timepoints after response across 

the two states . While the neuron -state interaction analysis focused on the states modulation 

of the firing of individual neurons, state -conditioned decoding analysis addressed changes in 335 

the whole population ensemble. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

State -related patterns of trial outcome representation share overlapping characteristics 

340 

As observed, even when the within -state decoding accuracy was significantly higher than the 

cross -state, the latter remained relatively high. Moreover, standard accuracy (i.e., accuracy of 

the decoding from the neural population without considering the sta tes) was also comparable 

to that of within -state decoding. This is due to similarities between the two states' neural 

Figure 4: A. State -conditioned decoding, within -state vs. cross -state accuracy . Comparison between 

within -state (i.e., training and testing on the same state) and cross -state (training on one state and testing 

on the other) accuracy, for the state -conditioned decoding analysis, within their 95% CI. For each time 

point, each state ha s a different number of trials. If the number of trials for any state at any point is lower 

than 5 per class, the decoding is not performed (gaps in the plot). The standard decoding is performed 

with all the trials used for both states, at any timepoint. P ermutation testing (10,000 permutations, ensuring 

class and state -balance at each permutation), is used to assess if the within -state accuracy is significantly 

higher than the cross -state accuracy, with respect to surrogate states. Green stars indicate whi ch points 

are significant, p<0.05, uncorrected. Yellow shaded areas indicate which points are significant after cluster -

based correction, p<0.05. B. Per -state (yellow for LPLT and red for HPHT) and standard decoding (i.e. 

decoding from all trials, in blue) accuracy, within their 95% CI. States accuracy fluctuate across time points, 

suggesting the states do not simply capture signal to noise ratio diff erences in the data. C. The absolute 

difference of the two states decoding weights, for visualization purposes. The main differences occur for 

most neurons across time, and are most accentuated when the two states have different decoding 

accuracies. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 

ensemble activity patterns. If the patterns were entirely distinct, cross -state accuracy would 345 

be at chance level, and standard accuracy would also be poor; while if they were nearly 

identical, cross -state accuracy would match that of within -state (and standard accuracy would 

be higher than both). To explore this effect , we simulated datasets with varying degrees of 

overlap between two data subsets, from fully similar , to fully distinct (see Methods ). The 

simulations indicated that our experimental data was best matched when the subsets had an 350 

information overlap between 70% and 80% ( Supplementary Figure 16 ). This suggests that, 

while the two states are distinct, they still share substantial amount of overlapping information. 

Discussion 355 

This study explores a form of oscillation -to -neuron relation in the hippocampus of rats 

performing an odo ur-memory , non -spatial task , wh ich we refer to as ensemble pattern 

reconfiguration . Using an unsupervised approach, w e identified two distinct theta states, low -

power -lower theta (LPLT) and high -power -higher theta (HPHT) . Using decoding analyses, we 360 

showed that the states were linked to differential neural ensemble activity reflective of trial 

outcome, meaning that the difference in neural population representing success vs failure 

might change across states. These states did not appear to recruit different neurons but rather 

were linked to change s in how the same population processed information. This suggests a 

mechanism of functional multiplexing, where the same neurons represent stimuli differently 365 

depending on the network configuration 14,15,20 .

Previous research on oscillation -to -neuron modulations in the hippocampus has primarily 

focused on phase precession, a phenomenon where the phase of theta oscillations influence s

the firing of single neurons during navigation 48 . Our work uncovers a different type of link 370 

between neural population activity and oscillations, where differences in neural firing patterns 

representing trial outcome are reflected in changes in amplitude and frequency of oscillations 

within the theta band. 

Our findings link the activity of single neurons and oscillations at the network level , contributing 375 

to the literature that aims at bridg ing different spatial scale s in the brain. Our conclusions are 

consistent with the concept of “frequency sliding” in the LFP data 43 , i.e. frequency of 

oscillations not constant in time, but “sliding” within a small range during cognitive processes 

and resting state , affecting the spiking threshold of single neurons . In Cohen (2014) , the author 

speculated that frequency sliding could serve functional purposes, as the slower frequencies 380 

could induce faster but more variable spiking time, and the faster frequencies would instead 

trigger slower but more precise firing. In this view, o ur work might help shed light in the 

functional mechanism s used for information encoding in the brain. 

Even though the HMM that we used to detect network states is a purely data -driven model 385 

with no neurobiological assumptions or knowledge of the task, the two distinct state peaks 

within the theta band are reminiscent of the two previously identified hippocampal theta 

modes , generated from regions projecting to the hippocampus, and related to different 

behavioural scenarios: Type I (~7 –12 Hz, atropine -resistant) during locomotion and Type II 

(~4 –7 Hz, atropine -sensitive) during attentive immobility 60 -69 . In awake immobility, theta has 390 

been observed to transiently accelerate toward the upper band yet remaining 

pharmacologically of Type II (that is, sensitive to atropine) 70 . The two data -driven states we 

observed here show some relation to movement in the experiment (namely, one state covered 

a wider range of positions), consistent with the traditional distinction of the two types of theta 

modes in the hippocampus in literature . The states , however, do not seem to be solely driven 395 

by motion , as they are both involved during the trials, performed in a constant spatial location, 

suggesting that coordinated shifts in theta frequency and power might be associated with 

ensemble -level reconfiguration in reflecting trial outcome. The exact biological function of 

these network states remains speculative. Mechanistic inference would require interventions 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 

to pinpoint the pathways driving the ensemble modulation, coupled with controlled task 400 

manipulations to establish functional relevance. Theta frequency also tracks internal states 

across behavio ural contexts: motor preparation 71 , environmental novelty 72 , and higher 

arousal states such as risk -taking 73 , anxiety 74 , and social interaction 75 . We acknowledge that 

residual motion contributions cannot be fully ruled out. Future work with head -fixed 

preparations would allow a cleaner dissociation between cognitive and motor contributions. 405 

Further investigation would also be needed to explore how these states relate to cognitive 

processes such as task engagement, decision making or learning 47 .

Importantly, we do not claim the existence of exactly two theta states in the hippocampus .

This number of states is simply the level of granularity afforded by the current data, but is 410 

sufficient to show the co -occurrence between the spectral properties of theta and the 

distributional properties of the neural firing with respect to behavioural context . This does not 

exclude that the effect we have uncovered is supported by variations within a continuous 

distribution, rather than by categorical distinct states. In any case, it still reveals a biologically 

relevant function in that changes within power and frequency of oscillatory patterns are linked 415 

to nuanced changes in population activity in its relation to behaviourally meaningful variables. 

Also importantly, whereas we are here describing a n oscillation -to -neuron modulation, we do 

not claim an underlying unidirectional causal flow from one to the other: oscillations and neural 

firing are two properties of the same system that emerge together. 

420 

Our focus on the theta band was dictated by its known relevance in the hippocampus, and 

because it is prominent in the data. However, the data showed oscillations across the 

broadband frequency spectrum, particularly in both beta and gamma bands. This is c onsistent 

with research on odour -related tasks (typically in the beta band 76 ) and on temporal processing 

(typically associated to gamma 77 ). It is important to note that, since we have not identified 425 

frequency and power as independent features of our states, we cannot disentangle them, 

implying we are not able with this analysis to further describe whether either one or both 

features are the main driving characteristics of this effect. 

We acknowledge the small number of animals analysed here as a limitation in this study .430 

Future research may explore whether these findings generalize to other animals, brain 

regions, or tasks. 

In conclusion, this study suggests that changes in the network state, identified here as subtle 

changes in oscillatory power and frequency, are correlated with how the neural population 435 

activity represents behavioural information, thus challenging static models of neural coding 20 .

That is, the hippocampal circuit might process complex variables such as success and failure 

in multiple ways depending on the state of the system. This underscores the role of theta 

oscillations in the hippocampus, reflecting a flexible neural informati on processing landscape, 

and possibly contributing to the brain’s adaptation to changing cognitive demands 6, 78 .440 

Methods 

Dataset 445 

The data were collected by Shahbaba and colleagues 49, 50 and made publicly available. The 

dataset consists of local field potential (LFP) and spike recordings from the dorsal CA1 region 

of five rats performing an odo ur-memory task. Rats learned a sequence of five different 

odo urs. In the experiment, they were presented with an odo ur at a time and had to identify it 450 

as either “in sequence”, if it was naturally following the learnt sequence, or “out of sequence”, 

if it was placed in a wrong position within the learnt sequence. Rats would judge the odo ur in 

sequence by holding their nose in the response port for at least 1.2 s to receive a water reward, 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

or out of sequence by withdrawing their nose before 1. 0 s to receive the reward. The data 

were recorded when rats had learnt to perform the task very well, so that success rate is above 455 

80%. For each rat, one session was recorded. Across animals , t he number of trials varied 

between 140 and 300 and the number of neurons detected varied between 40 and 80. The 

original sampling frequency of the data was 1kHz.  While the data of four out of five rats 

exhibited similar spectral characteristics, the power spectrum of the fifth rat was considerably 

different (see Supplementary Figure 17 ). This important differen ce , possibly due to a 460 

difference in electrode s placement (see Allen et al., 2016 50 for details in the electrode 

placement procedure), induc ed us to exclude subject 5 from our main analys es for 

consistency . For the sake of completeness, however, all analyses were performed also on 

Subject 5, reported in Supplementary Figure 18 .

465 

Data preprocessing 

The LFP channels recorded from the animals’ hippocampus varied between 18 and 24 across 

animals . Activity was very highly correlated across electrodes . On the raw LFP data per 

subject Z, with dimensions (number of timepoints by number of channels ), we applied principal 470 

component analysis (PCA; 79 ) to obtain  𝐙 ̃ , with dimensions (number of timepoints by number 

of principal components ). We then kept only the first principal component z, with shape 

(number of timepoints by one ), which explained between 60 % to 75% of the variance in each 

subject (subject 1: 65%, subject 2: 70%, subject 3: 60%, subject 4: 63% , subject 5: 75% ). To

remove noisy artifacts at lower frequencies, we high -pass filtered z, with a cut -off frequency 475 

of 4Hz. Finally , z was downsampled to 250Hz. To control for potential spike -LFP bleed through 

effects, we designed a sharp low -pass digital filter with a Kaiser window 80 to attenuate by 

100% the power on the LFP signal above 100 Hz, within a stopband of 1 Hz. The low -pass 

filtered data z<100 was then used for a parallel analysis, and results were compared with the 

minimally preprocessed data z.480 

We computed the spike density X from the raw spike data by means of a Gaussian kernel 81

(10ms width ). This way, the spike data (originally a binary vector per neuron ) was represented 

in a continuous form for subsequent analys es: X, with shape (number of trials by number of 

neurons, by timepoints per trial ) per subject . The data were then standardised per trial and 485 

per timepoint , across neurons , so that the population activity had the same mean and standard 

deviation for each trial and for each time point. This way, we maintain ed the relationship 

between the neurons , but we rescale d the overall activity at each timepoint and each trial. We 

did this so that the neuron s activity was not trivially linked to the states activation ( since higher 

average firing rate occurs when the state HPHT is active ). As with the LFP, the spike densities 490 

were downsampled to 250 Hz. 

Motion analysis and deconfounding 

As the experiment involved freely moving animals, we explicitly tested whether the HMM 495 

states and the neural representation of trial outcome could be explained by movement -related 

confounds. We distinguished between two types of movement: locomotion (full -body 

translation along the track) and head motion (local movements at the port, includi ng head 

turns and postural adjustments), and addressed each separately. 

500 

Movement data 

The Xp and Yp, coordinates of the animal head’s position along the track - recorded at a 30 

Hz sampling rate – were upsampled to the 250 Hz of the neural data, and smoothed with a 

gaussian kernel of width of 500ms to attenuate noise. The X p dimension corresponds to the 505 

long axis of the track, 150 cm long, while the Y p dimension corresponds to the short axis, 9 

cm wide. These coordinates are expressed in the reference system of the tracking probe ,

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 

where the coordinate [0,0] is outside the track, with the Xp track between coordinates 50 to 

1000 ( odour and reward port at approximately X p = 60–120 and the reward port at opposite 

end of the track at approximately X p = 900 -1000 ), and with Y p coordinates spanning between 510 

100 and 500 . Note that the exact scale in physical units (cm) should be ded uced according to 

the calibration used in the experiment. 

Characterisation of state -related movement 

515 

For each state visit (a state visit being a collection of consecutive time points assigned to one 

state) , we computed the mean and standard deviation of the X p and Y p position of the animal. 

We tested for significant differences in these distributions across states using the Mann -

Whitney U test 82 .

520 

Locomotion exclusion 

No universally accepted definition of locomotion exists for freely moving rodent recording 

experiments, with thresholds varying substantially depending on task structure 65,8 3,84 . We 

therefore defined an operational criterion adapted to the spatial constraints of our task. We 525 

classified a trial as locomotion -affected if the animal displaced more than approximately one 

body length ( ∼20 cm) along the long axis of the track (X p dimension) within any 500 ms 

window falling within the extended trial epoch of −1.0 to +2.5 s around response. This criterion 

corresponds to a minimum translational speed of ∼40 cm/s along the track axis, and it 

excludes only clear running bouts, not local head or postural movements. Applying this 530 

criterion, we excluded 13, 2, 18, and 2 trials for subjects 1, 2, 3, and 4 respectively. 

Head motion deconfounding 

After discarding locomotion -affected trials, we quantified how much residual head motion (X p535 

and Y p position) could predict trial outcome. To do so, we cut the position data into trials, so 

to have data M with dimensions number of trials by two (Xp and Yp dimension) by time points. 

We then standardized M across time per position dimension, and finally used class -balanced 

linear classification (ridge classifier, L2 penalty = 0.0 01) to predict trial outcome from M. We 

then treated head motion as a confound in all neural analyses by regressing out M from the 540 

spike density data X (per neuron and per time point) using linear regression. The residuals of 

this regression Xd were used in place of the original spike density for all subsequent motion -

deconfounded analyses. 

Definition of states through the HMM -TDE 545 

To detect network states, we used a time -delay embedded hidden Markov model (HMM -TDE ;

> 53

) on the preprocessed LFP data (see above) . The HMM is a data -driven, unsupervised 

method that automatically detects recurring patterns of activity in the data, referred to as 

states . Importantly, being data -driven, the HMM estimates the states agnostic of any 550 

experimental paradigm or trial information in the data. What defines a state depends on the 

choice of observation model of the HMM. In th is case, the observation model involves time -

dela y embedding s (TDE) of the data , focusing on the autocovariance of the signal . Previous 

work from the authors investigated the sensitivity of the HMM -TDE to various signal 

characteristics , showing that on one -channel data , the HMM -TDE reliably capture s the 555 

spectral properties of the signal 54 . The HMM gives a representation of the time -series data in 

terms of probabilistic sequences of states. From the data , the inference estimates : the states’ 

autocovariance , the probability of transitioning to a different state or of remain ing in the same 

state , and the initial probabilities . The HMM also outputs the probability of each data point to 

pertain to a state . An additional algorithmic procedure returns the Viterbi path 85, a categorical 560 

state assignment (instead of a probability) for each time point . Both the probabilities and the 

Viterbi path are refer red to as states time courses. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

The user -defined hyperparameters of HMM -TDE are: 

565 

- the number of states K ;

- the lags L: defining the length of the window in which to estimate the data 

autocovariance (from -L to +L around each time point) , which affect s the spectral 

scales that the states can capture; 

- the parameter  δ manipulating the prior probability of remaining in the same stat e, which 570 

influenc es the states switching rate .

Here, because of the high class -imbalance of the data with respect to the decoding variable 

(i.e., data had few failed trials) , we chose only K=2 states . The lags L and the prior probability 

parameter  δ were chosen such that the states would dwell for at least 500ms on average, 575 

forcing the states switching rate to be slow enough, so to be able to capture cognitive or 

physiological processes (typically, of the order of a second 86). In this specific case, we chose 

L=7.  δ=1bn for rats Buchanan , Stella and Barat , and  δ=10m for Mitt. See Masaracchia et al .

(2023 ) 54 for the rationale on the effect of modulating the hyperparameters on HMM -TDE. To 

characterise the states, we computed their power spectrum, lifetime, and fractional 580 

occupancy. 

We explicitly examine d the HMM -TDE ability to capture finer details in frequency. We used 

the same pipeline as in Masaracchia et al. (2023 ) 54 to simulate data varying only in frequency 

between 7 and 9 Hz, and run the HMM -TDE with the same settings as in this experiment (i.e., 585 

K=2, L=7,  δ= 1bn). We characterised the states by computing their power spectrum .

The HMM -TDE model , as well as the functions to estimate the states characteristics and 

power spectra, was implemented and made publicly available within the python GLHMM 

toolbox on GitHub : https://github.com/vidaurre/glhmm  87.590 

We then quantified statistically the difference between power and frequency of the two states. 

To do so, we computed the power spectrum of each state occurrence that was longer than 50 

timepoints (minimum number of data points to compute a power spectrum, arbitrarily chosen). 

We extracted the maximum power and its corresponding frequency for each valid (i.e., longer 595 

than 50 timepoints) state visit, obtaining a distribution of power and frequency for each state. 

We finally computed whether the difference in the power and frequency distribution between 

states were significant by means of the Mann -Whitney U test 82 , and corrected for multiple 

comparisons using the Benjamini/Hochberg method 88.

600 

To ex amine the states relation to theta phase, we computed the periodicity of occurrence of 

the states. This was done by computing the power spectrum of the state time courses, i.e. the 

probability of each state to be active at any time point. This measure shows the frequency of 

activation of the states (and because the states are exclusive, they have the same activation 

frequency ). To explicitly link theta phase to the state time courses, we computed the theta 605 

phase of each state visit and compare d the two states distribution in angles. To do so, we first 

extracted t he phase from the LFP signal, band -pass filtered in theta band (4 -12 Hz). We then 

grouped the theta phase time course into two groups , according to which state was active at 

each time point. This gave us two distributions of angles, one for each state, that we compared 

by means of the Watson U 2 test 89. This test is similar to the Mann -Whitney test but for circular 610 

data. To visualize the states distribution across theta phase , we divided the time courses in 

bins of 1/ 5th π angle each, and computed the fractional occupancy (FO) of the states for each 

bin (Supplementary Figure 4 ).

Simulating oscillations changing in shape 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

To test whether the HMM states could be driven by changes in the oscillation shape, we 615 

generated synthetic oscillatory signals using a process based on Genephys , a generative 

model of electrophysiological data (publicly available at  https://github.com/vidaurre/genephys 

> 90

), in which frequency  𝑓 , waveform shape modulation  𝑚 , and amplitude  𝑎  evolve as 

independent autoregressive processes of order one around prescribed targets. This structure 

introduces slow stochastic wander while maintaining temporal continuity to reproduce the 620 

variability observed in neural recordings as follows: 

𝑓 𝑡 = 𝑏 𝑓 𝑓 𝑡 −1 + 𝜀 𝑓 ,𝑡 , 𝜀 𝑓 ,𝑡 ~𝒩 (0, 𝜎 𝑓 )

𝑚 𝑡 = 𝑏 𝑚 𝑚 𝑡 −1 + 𝜀 𝑚 ,𝑡 , 𝜀 𝑚 ,𝑡 ~𝒩 (0, 𝜎 𝑚 )

𝑎 𝑡 = 𝑏 𝑎 𝑎 𝑡 −1 + 𝜀 𝑎 ,𝑡 , 𝜀 𝑎 ,𝑡 ~𝒩 (0, 𝜎 𝑎 )

Where  𝑏 𝑓 , 𝑏 𝑚  and  𝑏 𝑎  are the autoregressive weights of the process, and the various  𝜀  are 625 

noise contributions, normally distributed with zero mean and corresponding standard deviation 

𝜎 . To change the shape, we modulated the phase of the sinusoid  𝜙  according to a nonlinear 

cumulative update, with the carrier frequency determining the period and the modulation 

parameter  m distorting cycle symmetry: 

𝜙 𝑡 = 𝜙 𝑡 −1 + 2𝜋 𝑓 𝑡 

𝐹 𝑠 

(1 + 𝑚 𝑡 𝑐𝑜𝑠 𝜙 𝑡 −1)630 

Here  𝐹 𝑠  is the signal sampling rate. Thus, when  𝑚 = 0, the signal reduces to a sinusoid. Non -

zero values of  𝑚  accelerate phase progression during one half -cycle and decelerate it during 

the other, producing asymmetric waveforms without altering the period. 

The observed signal was obtained by modulating a sinusoid with these processes and adding 

Gaussian measurement noise: 635 

𝑥 𝑡 = 𝑎 𝑡 𝑠𝑖𝑛 (2𝜋 𝑓 𝑡 + 𝜙 𝑡 ) + 𝜀 𝑥 ,𝑡 , 𝜀 𝑥 ,𝑡 ~𝒩 (0, 𝜎 𝑥 )

To build continuous time series, we concatenated segments with randomized durations with 

a minimum bound of 10 seconds and rescaled to a fixed total duration of 5 minutes, ensuring 

heterogeneous segment lengths. We then specified frequency variation (7 - 9 Hz), shape 

variation with  𝑚 ∈ [0, 1], combining both independently across time. This design allowed us to 640 

control for frequency shifts, shape modulations, and their interaction on downstream analyses. 

Predicting state activations from neural activity 

To check whether the states captured the activity of different subpopulations o f neurons , we 

used supervised classification to predict the state activations from the neural activity 645 

(deconfounded for motion)  Xd. As the HPHT state generally involved higher firing rate for most 

neurons, the spike density was standardised per trial and per time point, across neurons . This 

way, we were able to capture differences that were above and beyond gross levels of 

activation . The decoding algorithm used was a ridge classifier with a fixed L2 penalty of 0.001. 

Because of the imbalanced distribution of the states across trials and time points, we 650 

implemented a class -balanced training -test decoding analysis : we bootstrapped sets with the 

same number of trials for train and testing for each state, per time point. We repeated the 

procedure 100 times, randomly sampling the trials involved in the analysis for each repetition. 

This way, we ensured a consistent class balance for all time points. We measured accuracy 

as an average across all bootstrap repetitions, per time point. 655 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

Predicting trial outcome from neural activity and state activations 

To determine the contribution of network states to the prediction of trial outcome, we used 

standard ridge regression, and permutation testing. Specifically, we aimed at predicting the 660 

trial outcome variable Y from three factors: the neural activity (deconfounded for motion)  Xd,

the states activation and their interaction (i.e., the multiplication between the two terms). For 

each neuron and each timepoint, we have the following regression equation: 

665 

where  Xd is the value of the kernel -smoothed activity deconfounded for motion, for each 

neuron and for each timepoint, a vector of length number of trials, G indicates whether state 

HPHT or LPLT is active (a vector of length number of trials, with elements equal either to 1 or 

-1), w are the regression coefficients (one number for each w), and the intercept b (a vector of 670 

length number of trials, with one value, repeated for each trial) is related to the class balance. 

In particular, the  𝑤 𝑋𝐺  coefficients reflected the interaction between the states activation and 

the neurons activity. We computed the regression coefficients that minimize the prediction 

error, i.e., the mean absolute error between the predicted and true value of Y. We used a sm all 

L2 penalty of 0.001. Here, the rationale for using Ridge regression instead of logistic 675 

regression is that for a binary classification problem the least square error metric would allow 

for a more nuanced description of the prediction output 91 .

To quantify the significance of the states’ contributions in explaining trial outcome, we used 

permutation testing. Specifically, we compared the mean absolute error from the original 680 

regression model, with the network states identified by the HMM, against models using 

randomly shuffled states (10,000 random permutations). The shuffling was performed by 

swapping the probability of each state in randomly selected 50% of trials (where swapping 

100% of the trials in this case corresponds to simply swap the states labels), for each 

permutation. This shuffling procedure ensured that only the states’ effect (and not the overall 685 

prediction power) was tested. This gave a p -value for each neuron and for each time point, 

that we corrected for multiple comparisons using a cluster -based spati al -temporal correction 92 .

The correction proceeded as follows. For each neuron and time point, we defined an effect 

score as the difference between the mean null MAE (averaged across permutations) and the 690 

observed MAE: a positive score indicates that the observed prediction error is lower than 

expected under the null, i.e. that the model genuinely outperforms chance. We computed a 

one -tailed p -value at each neuron –time -point as the fraction of permutations for which the null 

MAE was less than or equal to the observed MAE; a small p -value therefore indicates that the 

observed prediction was better than nearly all permutation runs. Points with p < 0.05 were 695 

thresholded to form a binary map, and contiguous regions in the neuron –time plane (allowing 

adjacency both along the time axis and across neurons ) were labelled as clusters. The mass 

of each cluster was defined as the sum of the effect scores across all neuron –timepoint pairs 

within the cluster; this weights the cluster statistic by effect strength rather than cluster size 

alone. To build the null d istribution of maximum cluster masses, the same procedure was 700 

applied to each of the 10,000 permutation runs: the permuted p -values were thresholded at 

p < 0.05, clusters were identified in the permuted data, and the maximum cluster mass was 

recorded. A cluster in the observed data was declared significant if its mas s exceeded the 

95th percentile of this null distribution (cluster -level α = 0.05). 

705 

State -conditioned decoding 

To investigate the effect of the mesoscale activity (represented by the two spectrally -specific 

network states ) on the patterns of population activity reflective of success and failure, we 

developed a method to decode trial outcome from neural activity (deconfounded for motion) .710 

To be able to  predict trial outcome from the population activity across states, all network states 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 

needed to be involved (at least to some extent) in both successful and failed trials. However, 

given the skewed nature of trial outcome (meaning, rats performed successfully more than 

80% of the trials), this condition could only be fulfilled by using the minimum number of two 

network state s. Note that the number of states is a matter of granularity in the analysis, and 715 

does not mean a biological claim. We first used the HMM state time courses (indicating which 

state was active at any given point) to divide, at each time point, the neural activity into two 

non -overlapping sets of trials , each related to the current active state. We then used a ridge 

classifier (with a small L2 penalty of 0.001 ) to decode trial outcome from each of the two state -

related sets independently , for each time point. 720 

Due to the high class -imbalance of the data , we implemented a custom class -balanced 

training -test procedure. The procedure consisted o f using only a subset of data for training 

and testing , the same amount from each class . We repeat ed this step 200 times, randomly 

sampling the trials for training and testing from each class at each repetition. This gave us a 725 

measure of accuracy and a confidence interval for each state and each time point. For 

example, if at time point t the LPLT state -related set contained 100 successful and only 20 

failed trials , we would run the LPLT -related decoder at time point t by using only 16 out of the 

20 failed trials for training and 4 trials for testing, and 16 trials for training and 4 for testing from 

the successful trials pool ; we would randomly sample (with no repetition) the trials to use for 730 

training or testing for each of the 200 permutations.  To ensure comparability of decoder 

performance and weights across the two states, we additionally enforced state balance across 

decoders: at each time point, the two per -state decoders were constrained to use the same 

number of trials. When one state had m ore trials available at a given time point, a random 

subset matching the size of the smaller state was drawn at each bootstrap repetition. This 735 

ensures that any observed differences in decoding accuracy between states are not driven by 

differences in trial counts.  We called our method state -conditioned decoding .

To quantify the difference between the two network states -related patterns of activity reflective 

of trial outcome , we com pared the decoding accuracy of models trained and tested within the 740 

same state ( within -state ) and the accuracy of models trained on one state and tested on the 

other ( cross -state ). In all cases the models were tested on unseen data during training .

To assess the significance of the difference between the state -related population activity 

patterns, we performed permutation testing. This consisted of randomly assigning trials at 745 

each time point to one or the other state, while respecting the original state - and class -balance ,

for 10 ,000 random permutations. For each permutation, we performed state -conditioned 

decoding on the random sets of trials (enforcing a class -balance and a state -balance at each 

permutation) and compute d within -state and cross -state decoding accuracy. 

750 

The difference between within -state and cross -state decoding accuracy in randomly assigned 

states was compared to the original difference (i.e., in the analysis performed with the original 

HMM states), for each time point. We assessed the significance of t his difference (within minus 

cross -state decoding accuracy) in the HMM versus the random states case, by computing a 

p-value and correcting for multiple comparisons using a cluster -based permutation 755 

approach 92 . Specifically, at each time point we computed the observed difference between 

within -state and cross -state decoding accuracy under the original HMM state assignments. A 

time point was considered above threshold if the observed difference exceeded the 95th 

percentile of the pointwise permutation null distribution (one -tailed, α = 0.05). Clusters were 

defined as contiguous runs of above -threshold time points. For each cluster, a cluster -level 760 

statistic was computed as the sum of the observed differences across all time points in the 

cluster. To assess the significance of each cluster, we built a null distribution of maximum 

cluster statistics: for each of the 10,000 permutations, we applied the same thresholding 

procedure to the permuted differences and recorded the maximum cluster statistic. A cluster 

was declared significant if its statistic exceeded the 95th percen tile of this null distribution 765 

(cluster -level α = 0.05). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

Simulations 

In order to better understand the results from our state -conditioned decoding, especially why 770 

the cross -state decoding accuracy was relatively high, even when significantly lower than the 

within -state decoding accuracy, we used simulations . We generated two sets of data with 

varying degrees of similarities, run state -conditioned decoding on the synthetic datasets, and 

compared the results from the various scenarios to our experimental results. For comparison, 

we also run standard decoding, i.e. decoding without distinguishing between one or the other 775 

set of data. 

For this analysis, w e generated two random sets of points and the encoding weights that would 

make the data carry information . The various scenarios, depicting various degrees of 

similarities between the two datasets, were controlled by the encoding weights : the two sets 780 

would carry identical information (and simply be part of one bigger dataset) if the encoding 

weights were identica l; the scenario with completely different encoding weights represented 

the extreme of non -overlapping information between the two sets . Every other scenario in 

between was generated by using overlapping weights, controlled by the parameter α. Here 

follow the equations of our generative model: 785 

𝑦 1 = 𝑋 1 𝐵 1 + 𝜖 1 , 𝑦 2 = 𝑋 2 [𝑎 𝐵 1 + (1 − 𝑎 ) 𝐵 2] + 𝜖 2

Wher e 𝑋 1 and  𝑋 2 are random data generated as  ~𝑁 (0,4); the dimensions of  𝑋 1 and  𝑋 2 were 

made comparable to our experimental data, so we used N=100 as number of trials and p=50 790 

as number of neurons.  𝜖 1 and  𝜖 2 are random gaussian noise distributed as  ~𝑁 (0,1); 𝐵 1 and 

𝐵 2 are the encoding weights both distributed as  ~𝑁 (0,4); and  𝑎 , ranging between 0 and 1, 

indicates the degree of similarity between the two sets of data. 

Then, we run the decoding analyses to predict the encoded information (and the encoding 795 

weights). Within -set and cross -set decoding were run on the two synthetic sets of data, to 

decode  𝑦 1 and  𝑦 2. Standard decoding was run on the concatenated sets to predict an overall 

y ( 𝑦 1 and  𝑦 2, concatenated ). The decoding accuracies obtained were then compared to the 

experimental results. 

800 

Data & code availability 

The data used in this study were pre -collected by Norbert Fortin’s lab and made publicly 

available (see 49 ). The code used to perform all the analyses is available on GitHub at 

https://github.com/LauraMasaracchia/state -conditioned_decoding .805 

Conflict of Interest: 

The authors declare no competing financial interests 

810 

Acknowledgements: 

DV is supported by a Novo Nordisk Foundation Emerging Investigator Fellowship (NNF19OC -

0054895) and an ERC Starting Grant (ERC -StG -2019 -850404). The authors would also like 

to thank the Wellcome Trust for support (106183/Z/14/Z, 215573/Z/19/Z). Finally, th e authors 

would like to thank Norbert Fortin and Keiland Cooper for providing the raw data, together with 815 

task information and insights into the data structure. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

References 

1.  Stringer, C. et al. Spontaneous behaviors drive multidimensional, brainwide activity. Science 820  364 , (2019). 

2.  Buzsáki, G. The Brain from Inside and Out. Oxford (2019). 

3.  Grün, S. et al. Emerging principles of spacetime in brains: Meeting report on spatial 

neurodynamics. in Neuron vol. 110 (2022). 

4.  Gutnisky, D. A., Beaman, C. B., Lew, S. E. & Dragoi, V. Spontaneous fluctuations in visual 825  cortical responses influence population coding accuracy. Cerebral Cortex 27 , (2017). 

5.  Mazzucato, L., La Camera, G. & Fontanini, A. Expectation -induced modulation of metastable 

activity underlies faster coding of sensory stimuli. Nat Neurosci 22 , (2019). 

6.  Kennedy, P. J. & Shapiro, M. L. Motivational states activate distinct hippocampal representations 

to guide goal -directed behaviors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106 , (2009). 830  7.  Staszko, S. M., Boughter, J. D. & Fletcher, M. L. The impact of familiarity on cortical taste coding. 

Current Biology 32 , (2022). 

8.  Kisley, M. A. & Gerstein, G. L. Trial -to -trial variability and state -dependent modulation of 

auditory - evoked responses in cortex. Journal of Neuroscience 19 , (1999). 

9.  Schölvinck, M. L., Saleem, A. B., Benucci, A., Harris, K. D. & Carandini, M. Cortical state 835  determines global variability and correlations in visual cortex. Journal of Neuroscience 35 ,

(2015). 

10.  Jones, L. M., Fontanini, A., Sadacca, B. F., Miller, P. & Katz, D. B. Natural stimuli evoke dynamic 

sequences of states in sensory cortical ensembles. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104 , (2007). 

11.  Sederberg, A. J., Pala, A., Zheng, H. J. V., He, B. J. & Stanley, G. B. State -aware detection of 840  sensory stimuli in the cortex of the awake mouse. PLoS Comput Biol 15 , (2019). 

12.  Murakami, M., Kashiwadani, H., Kirino, Y. & Mori, K. State -dependent sensory gating in olfactory 

cortex. Neuron 46 , (2005). 

13.  Fontanini, A. & Katz, D. B. State -dependent modulation of time -varying gustatory responses. J

Neurophysiol 96 , (2006). 845  14.  Fontanini, A. & Katz, D. B. Behavioral states, network states, and sensory response variability. 

Journal of Neurophysiology vol. 100 Preprint at  https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.90592.2008  (2008). 

15.  Buonomano, D. V. & Maass, W. State -dependent computations: Spatiotemporal processing in 

cortical networks. Nature Reviews Neuroscience vol. 10 Preprint at 

https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2558  (2009). 850  16.  McCormick, D. A., Nestvogel, D. B. & He, B. J. Neuromodulation of Brain State and Behavior. 

Annual Review of Neuroscience vol. 43 Preprint at  https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev -neuro -

100219 -105424  (2020). 

17.  Fazlali, Z., Ranjbar -Slamloo, Y., Adibi, M. & Arabzadeh, E. Correlation between cortical state 

and locus coeruleus activity: Implications for sensory coding in rat barrel cortex. Front Neural 855  Circuits 10 , (2016). 

18.  Marques, J. C., Li, M., Schaak, D., Robson, D. N. & Li, J. M. Internal state dynamics shape 

brainwide activity and foraging behaviour. Nature 577 , (2020). 

19.  Allen, W. E.  et al.  Thirst regulates motivated behavior through modulation of brainwide neural 

population dynamics. Science (1979) 364 , (2019). 860  20.  Lin, J. Y. et al. The function of groups of neurons changes from moment to moment. Current 

Opinion in Physiology vol. 20 Preprint at  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cophys.2020.12.002  (2021). 

21.  Buzsáki, G. Rhythms of the Brain (2009). doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195301069.001.0001. 

22.  Buzsáki G, Draguhn A. Neuronal oscillations in cortical networks. Science. 2004 Jun 

25;304(5679):1926 -9. doi: 10.1126/science.1099745. PMID: 15218136. 865  23.  Arnal, L. H., Giraud, A. -L. Cortical oscillations and sensory predictions. Trends in Cognitive 

Sciences, Volume 16, Issue 7 (2012).  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2012.05.003 .

24.  Başar E, Başar -Eroglu C, Karakaş S, Schürmann M. Gamma, alpha, delta, and theta oscillations 

govern cognitive processes. Int J Psychophysiol. 2001 Jan;39(2 -3):241 -8. doi: 10.1016/s0167 -

8760(00)00145 -8. 870  25.  Kahana MJ. The cognitive correlates of human brain oscillations. J Neurosci . 2006 Feb 

8;26(6):1669 -72. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3737 -05c.2006. 

26.  Colgin, L. L. Rhythms of the hippocampal network. Nature Reviews Neuroscience vol. 17 

Preprint at  https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn.2016.21  (2016). 

27.  Lisman, J. E. & Jensen, O. The Theta -Gamma Neural Code. Neuron vol. 77 Preprint at 875  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2013.03.007  (2013). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

28.  Buzsáki, G., Anastassiou, C. & Koch, C. The origin of extracellular fields and currents — EEG, 

ECoG, LFP and spikes. Nat Rev Neurosci 13 , 407 –420 (2012).  https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3241 .

29.  Han KS, Guo C, Chen CH, Witter L, Osorno T, Regehr WG. Ephaptic Coupling Promotes 

Synchronous Firing of Cerebellar Purkinje Cells. Neuron. 2018 Nov 7;100(3):564 -578.e3. doi: 880  10.1016/j.neuron.2018.09.018. 

30.  Akam T, Kullmann DM. Oscillatory multiplexing of population codes for selective communication 

in the mammalian brain. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2014 Feb;15(2):111 -22. doi: 10.1038/nrn3668. Epub 

2014 Jan 17. PMID: 24434912; PMCID: PMC4724886. 

31.  Fries P. A mechanism for cognitive dynamics: neuronal communication through neuronal 885  coherence. Trends Cogn Sci. 2005 Oct;9(10):474 -80. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2005.08.011. PMID: 

16150631. 

32.  Hyman JM, Zilli EA, Paley AM, Hasselmo ME. Medial prefrontal cortex cells show dynamic 

modulation with the hippocampal theta rhythm dependent on behavior. Hippocampus. 

2005;15(6):739 -49. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20106. PMID: 16015622. 890  33.  Haegens S, Nácher V, Luna R, Romo R, Jensen O. α -Oscillations in the monkey sensorimotor 

network influence discrimination performance by rhythmical inhibition of neuronal spiking. Proc 

Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Nov 29;108(48):19377 -82. doi: 10.1073/pnas.11 17190108. Epub 

2011 Nov 14. PMID: 22084106; PMCID: PMC3228466. 

34.  Murthy VN, Fetz EE. Synchronization of neurons during local field potential oscillations in 895  sensorimotor cortex of awake monkeys. J Neurophysiol. 1996 Dec;76(6):3968 -82. doi: 

10.1152/jn.1996.76.6.3968. PMID: 8985893. 

35.  Benchenane K, Peyrache A, Khamassi M, Tierney PL, Gioanni Y, Battaglia FP, Wiener SI. 

Coherent theta oscillations and reorganization of spike timing in the hippocampal - prefrontal 

network upon learning. Neuron. 2010 Jun 24;66(6):921 -36. doi: 10.1016/j.neur on.2010.05.013. 900  PMID: 20620877. 

36.  Muir GM, Bilkey DK. Theta - and movement velocity -related firing of hippocampal neurons is 

disrupted by lesions centered on the perirhinal cortex. Hippocampus. 2003;13(1):93 -108. doi: 

10.1002/hipo.10052. PMID: 12625461. 

37.  Dugué L, Marque P, VanRullen R. The phase of ongoing oscillations mediates the causal 905  relation between brain excitation and visual perception. J Neurosci. 2011 Aug 17;31(33):11889 -

93. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1161 -11.2011. PMID: 21849549; PMCID: PMC6623205. 

38.  Raghavachari S, Kahana MJ, Rizzuto DS, Caplan JB, Kirschen MP, Bourgeois B, Madsen JR, 

Lisman JE. Gating of human theta oscillations by a working memory task. J Neurosci. 2001 May 

1;21(9):3175 -83. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.21 -09 -03175.2001. PMID: 11312302; PM CID: 910  PMC6762557. 

39.  Nelli, S., Itthipuripat, S., Srinivasan, R.  et al.  Fluctuations in instantaneous frequency predict 

alpha amplitude during visual perception. Nat Commun 8, 2071 (2017). 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -017 -02176 -x

40.  Mazzoni A, Panzeri S, Logothetis NK, Brunel N. Encoding of naturalistic stimuli by local field 915  potential spectra in networks of excitatory and inhibitory neurons. PLoS Comput Biol. 2008 

Dec;4(12):e1000239. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000239. Epub 2008 Dec 12. PMID: 19079571; 

PMCID: PMC2585056. 

41. M. Dipoppa, & B.S. Gutkin, Flexible frequency control of cortical oscillations enables 

computations required for working memory, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 110 (31) 12828 -920  12833,  https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1303270110  (2013). 

42.  Andreas Mierau, Wolfgang Klimesch, Jérémie Lefebvre, State -dependent alpha peak frequency 

shifts: Experimental evidence, potential mechanisms and functional implications, Neuroscience, 

2017,  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2017.07.037 .

43.  Cohen, M. X., Fluctuations in Oscillation Frequency Control Spike Timing and Coordinate Neural 925  Networks, Journal of Neuroscience , 2014, 34 (27) 8988 

8998;  https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0261 -14.2014 

44.  Buzsáki, G. Theta rhythm of navigation: Link between path integration and landmark navigation, 

episodic and semantic memory. Hippocampus vol. 15 Preprint at 

https://doi.org/10.1002/hipo.20113  (2005). 930  45.  Muzzio, I. A., Kentros, C. & Kandel, E. What is remembered? Role of attention on the encoding 

and retrieval of hippocampal representations. Journal of Physiology vol. 587 Preprint at 

https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2009.172445  (2009). 

46.  Muzzio, I. A.  et al.  Attention enhances the retrieval and stability of visuospatial and olfactory 

representations in the dorsal hippocampus. PLoS Biol 7, (2009). 935 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

47.  Korotkova, T. et al. Reconciling the different faces of hippocampal theta: The role of theta 

oscillations in cognitive, emotional and innate behaviors. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral 

Reviews vol. 85 Preprint at  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.09.004  (2018). 

48.  O’Keefe, J. & Recce, M. L. Phase relationship between hippocampal place units and the EEG 

theta rhythm. Hippocampus 3, (1993). 940  49.  Shahbaba, B. et al. Hippocampal ensembles represent sequential relationships among an 

extended sequence of nonspatial events. Nat Commun 13 , (2022). 

50.  Timothy A. Allen , Daniel M. Salz , Sam McKenzie and Norbert J. Fortin, Nonspatial Sequence 

Coding in CA1 Neurons . Journal of Neuroscience , 2016, 36 (5) 1547 -

1563;  https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2874 -15.2016 945  51.  Rabiner, L. R. A Tutorial on Hidden Markov Models and Selected Applications in Speech 

Recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE 77 , (1989). 

52.  Vidaurre, D. et al. Spectrally resolved fast transient brain states in electrophysiological data. 

Neuroimage 126 , 81 –95 (2016 ). 

53.  Vidaurre, D. et al. Spontaneous cortical activity transiently organises into frequency specific 950  phase -coupling networks. Nat Commun 9, (2018). 

54.  Masaracchia, L., Fredes, F., Woolrich, M. W. & Vidaurre, D. Dissecting unsupervised learning 

through hidden Markov modeling in electrophysiological data. J Neurophysiol 130 , 364 –379 

(2023). 

55.  Alejandro Terrazas , Michael Krause , Peter Lipa , Katalin M. Gothard , Carol A. 955  Barnes and Bruce L. McNaughton , Self -Motion and the Hippocampal Spatial Metric , Journal of 

Neuroscience , 2005, 25 (35) 8085 -8096;  https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0693 -05.2005 

56.  Supratim Ray, Challenges in the quantification and interpretation of spike -LFP relationships, 

Current Opinion in Neurobiology , 2015,  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2014.09.004 .

57.  Zanos TP, Mineault PJ, Pack CC. Removal of spurious correlations between spikes and local 960  field potentials. J Neurophysiol. 2011 Jan;105(1):474 -86. doi: 10.1152/jn.00642.2010. Epub 

2010 Nov 10. PMID: 21068271. 

58.  Supratim Ray , Steven S. Hsiao , Nathan E. Crone , Piotr J. Franaszczuk and Ernst Niebur, 

Effect of Stimulus Intensity on the Spike –Local Field Potential Relationship in the Secondary 

Somatosensory Cortex, Journal of Neuroscience , 2008, 28 (29) 7334 -965  7343;  https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1588 -08.2008 

59.  Erik W. Schomburg , Costas A. Anastassiou , György Buzsáki and Christof Koch, The Spiking 

Component of Oscillatory Extracellular Potentials in the Rat Hippocampus, Journal of Neuroscience ,

2012, 32 (34) 11798 -11811; https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0656 -12.2012 

60.  Fredes, F. & Shigemoto, R. The role of hippocampal mossy cells in novelty detection. Neurobiol 970  Learn Mem 183 , (2021). 

61.  López -Madrona, V. J.  et al.  Different theta frameworks coexist in the rat hippocampus and are 

coordinated during memory -guided and novelty tasks. Elife 9, (2020). 

62.  Jinno, S., Ishizuka, S. & Kosaka, T. Ionic currents underlying rhythmic bursting of ventral mossy 

cells in the developing mouse dentate gyrus. European Journal of Neuroscience 17 , (2003). 975  63.  Fredes, F. et al. Ventro -dorsal Hippocampal Pathway Gates Novelty -Induced Contextual 

Memory Formation. Current Biology 31 , (2021). 

64.  Wang, Y., Romani, S., Lustig, B., Leonardo, A. & Pastalkova, E. Theta sequences are essential 

for internally generated hippocampal firing fields. Nat Neurosci 18 , (2015). 

65. Vanderwolf, C. H. (1969). Hippocampal electrical activity and voluntary movement in the 980  rat. Electroencephalography and clinical neurophysiology , 26 (4), 407 -418. 

66.  Kramis, R., Vanderwolf, C. H., & Bland, B. H. (1975).  Two types of hippocampal rhythmical slow 

activity in both the rabbit and the rat: relations to behavior and effects of atropine, diethyl ether, 

urethane, and pentobarbital. Experimental neurology , 49 (1), 58 -85. 

67. Bland, B. H. (1986). The physiology and pharmacology of hippocampal formation theta 985  rhythms. Progress in neurobiology , 26 (1), 1 -54. 

68. Buzsáki, G. (2002). Theta oscillations in the hippocampus. Neuron , 33 (3), 325 -340. 

69. Buzsáki, G., & Moser, E. I. (2013). Memory, navigation and theta rhythm in the hippocampal -

entorhinal system. Nature neuroscience , 16 (2), 130 -138. 

70.  Tai, S. K., Ma, J., Ossenkopp, K. P., & Leung, L. S. (2012).  Activation of immobility ‐related 990  hippocampal theta by cholinergic septohippocampal neurons during vestibular 

stimulation. Hippocampus , 22 (4), 914 -925. 

71. Oddie, S. D., Kirk, I. J., Whishaw, I. Q., & Bland, B. H. (1997). Hippocampal formation is involved 

in movement selection: evidence from medial septal cholinergic modulation and concurrent 

slow -wave (theta rhythm) recording. Behavioural brain research , 88 (2), 169 -180. 995 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

72. Jeewajee, A., Lever, C., Burton, S., O'keefe, J., & Burgess, N. (2008). Environmental novelty is 

signaled by reduction of the hippocampal theta frequency. Hippocampus , 18 (4), 340 -348. 

73. Mikulovic, S., Restrepo, C. E., Siwani, S., Bauer, P., Pupe, S., Tort, A. B., ... & Leão, R. N. 

(2018). Ventral hippocampal OLM cells control type 2 theta oscillations and response to predator 

odor. Nature communications , 9(1), 3638. 1000  74. Adhikari, A., Topiwala, M. A., & Gordon, J. A. (2010). Synchronized activity between the ventral 

hippocampus and the medial prefrontal cortex during anxiety. Neuron , 65 (2), 257 -269. 

75. Tendler, A., & Wagner, S. (2015). Different types of theta rhythmicity are induced by social and 

fearful stimuli in a network associated with social memory. elife , 4, e03614. 

76.  Miles JT, Kidder KS, Mizumori SJY. Hippocampal beta rhythms as a bridge between sensory 1005  learning and memory -guided decision -making. Front Syst Neurosci . 2023 May 5;17:1187272. 

doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2023.1187272. PMID: 37215359; PMCID: PMC10196064. 

77.  Colgin LL, Moser EI. Gamma oscillations in the hippocampus. Physiology (Bethesda). 2010 

Oct;25(5):319 -29. doi: 10.1152/physiol.00021.2010. PMID: 20940437. 

78.  Turner, V. S., O’Sullivan, R. O. & Kheirbek, M. A. Linking external stimuli with internal drives: A 1010  role for the ventral hippocampus. Current Opinion in Neurobiology vol. 76 Preprint at 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2022.102590  (2022). 

79.  Jollife, I. T. & Cadima, J. Principal component analysis: A review and recent developments. 

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering 

Sciences vol. 374 Preprint at  https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2015.0202  (2016). 1015  80.  Kaiser, James F. “Nonrecursive Digital Filter Design Using the I0 -Sinh Window Function.” 

Proceedings of the 1974 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems. 1974, pp. 20 –

23. 

81.  Rasmussen, C. E. & Williams, C. K. I. Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning . Gaussian 

Processes for Machine Learning (2005). doi:10.7551/mitpress/3206.001.0001. 1020  82.  H. B. Mann. D. R. Whitney. "On a Test of Whether one of Two Random Variables is 

Stochastically Larger than the Other." Ann. Math. Statist. 18 (1) 50 - 60, March, 

1947.https://doi.org/10.1214/aoms/1177730491 

83.  Kropff, E., Carmichael, J., Moser, MB.  et al.  Speed cells in the medial entorhinal 

cortex. Nature 523 , 419 –424 (2015).  https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14622 1025  84.  Carvalho MM, Tanke N, Kropff E, Witter MP, Moser MB, Moser EI.  A Brainstem Locomotor 

Circuit Drives the Activity of Speed Cells in the Medial Entorhinal Cortex. Cell Rep. 2020 Sep 

8;32(10):108123. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108123. PMID: 32905779; PMCID: PMC7487772. 

85.  Forney, G. D. The Viterbi Algorithm. Proceedings of the IEEE 61 , (1973). 

86.  Buonomano, D. The biology of time across different scales. Nat Chem Biol 3, 594 –597 (2007). 1030  https://doi.org/10.1038/nchembio1007 -594 .

87.  Vidaurre, D., Masaracchia, L., Larsen, N. Y., Ruijters, L. R. T., Alonso, S., Ahrends, C., & 

Woolrich, M. W. (2023). The Gaussian -Linear Hidden Markov model: a Python package. arXiv 

preprint arXiv:2312.07151 .

88.  Benjamini, Y. & Hochberg, Y. Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A Practical and Powerful 1035  Approach to Multiple Testing. J R Stat Soc Series B Stat Methodol 57 , (1995). 

89.  Landler, L., Ruxton, G.D. & Malkemper, E.P. Advice on comparing two independent samples of 

circular data in biology. Sci Rep 11 , 20337 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -021 -99299 -5

90. Diego Vidaurre (2024) A generative model of electrophysiological brain responses to stimulation, 

eLife , 12:RP87729,  https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.87729.3 1040  91.  Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., and Friedman, J., The Elements of Statistical Learning (2009). 

Springer New York, NY.  https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -0-387 -84858 -7

92.  Maris E, Oostenveld R. Nonparametric statistical testing of EEG - and MEG -data. J Neurosci 

Methods. 2007 Aug 15;164(1):177 -90. doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2007.03.024. Epub 2007 Apr 10. 

PMID: 17517438. 1045 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

# SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURES 

1050 

SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE 1 

SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE 2

Supplementary Figure 1: Power difference between HPHT and LPLT states . Here plotted the 

ratio between the two states power spectrum (HPHT / LPLT), to better visualise the difference in 

power between the two states proportionally to the overall broadband power spectrum. 

Supplementary Figure 2: Statistical characterization of the states. A Power spectrum 

distribution of the states . For each state visit longer than 50 timepoints, the max power and its 

corresponding frequency is plotted, for each state, for each subject. B Frequency distribution 

of state visits. The frequency of each state visit longer than 50 points is plotted as a distribution, 

per state and per subject. C Power distribution of state visits. Like in B, but for the max power 

of each state visit counted. The two state distributions (frequency distributions in B and power 

distributions in C) are then statistically compared by means of the Mann -Whitney U test (for 

each subject). Here represented with * a p value <0.05, and with ** a p value < 0.0001. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE 3 1055 

SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE 4 

1060 

Supplementary Figure 3: Testing HMM sensitivity to frequency. A . Example of synthetic 

signal used to test the HMM sensitivity on frequency (top panel), together with its instantaneous 

frequency (bottom panel). The signal is simulated as a simple sinusoid with amplitude a= 5, 

Gaussian noise with standard deviation = 1, and instantaneous frequency determined as a semi 

random walk bounded between 7 and 9 Hz. B. Power spectrum of HMM states . Here, the HMM 

settings are identical to those in our experiment: K=2, L=7. δ =1 bn. The power spectrum of the 

states shows a peak frequency difference of about 1Hz. 

Supplementary Figure 4: States fractional occupancy (FO) as a function of theta phase. 

For each theta phase bin of 1/5 π, the states FO is computed and plotted cumulatively. The green 

window highlights significant changes within the distribution of states FO across phase. This 

serves as a visual representation of the states distribution around theta phase. For the details on 

the analysis, see Methods .

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 

SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE 5 

1065 

Supplementary Figure 5: States characterization per subject. A. States power spectra. 

Frequency and power content of each state for each subject individually. The HMM 

consistently finds a high -power, higher theta (HPHT, red) and low -power, lower theta (LPLT, 

yellow) state. B. States lifetime and fractional occupancy . The count of the time length of 

each state occurrence, per state and per subject . Fractional occupancy (FO) accounts for the 

overall presence of a state in the entire dataset. Both FO and states lifetime are comparable 

across states. C. States periodicity. The period of each state activation, per subject . States 

reoccur typically with a period around 1 -2 Hz, meaning that each state occurs on average 

once to twice per second. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE 6 

1070 

SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE 7

Supplementary Figure 6: HMM analysis on synthetic data changing in shape and 

frequency independently . A. Example of signal changing in shape and frequency . Example of 

the synthetic signal (top panel), with its instantaneous frequency (middle panel) and the 

instantaneous shape distortion coefficient m (bottom panel). B. Example of the HMM states time 

courses on the signal plotted in A. C. States power spectrum. Power spectrum of the HMM 

states found on the signal in A. The states show different frequency peak. D. States shape 

distortio n. The average distortion of the signal captured by each state. Each state captures a 

certain amount of distorted signal, meaning that the HMM state decomposition is driven mostly 

by frequency. 

Supplementary Figure 7: Correlation 

between the HMM run on the minimally 

pre -processed LFP signal and the HMM 

run on the low -pass filtered LFP signal .

A. Two example s of HMM state time 

courses (STC) on the minimally pre -

processed LFP data (top row) and on the 

low -pass filtered data (bottom row), and 

their correlation , for Subject 1 (highly 

correlated) and Subject 3 ( relatively less 

highly correlated ). B. Correlation between 

HMM run s on the minimally pre -processed 

signal and on the low -pass filtered signal, 

over 10 different runs. The HMM on the 

minimally pre -processed signal is run every 

time with random initial conditions. The 

HMM on the low -pass filtered signal is run 

by setting as initial conditions the HMM on 

the minimally pre -processed signal (to 

control for the inherent variability of 

stochastic inference of HMM). The red line 

in the box shows the mean, the box 

indicates the variance, and the eventual 

extra line indicates outliers. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE 8

1075 

1080 

1085 

1090 

1095 

1100 

1105 

1110 

1115 

1120 

1125 

Supplementary Figure 8: Neuronal average firing rate per state. Average firing rate and its standard 

deviation for each neuron during the different states. The HPHT (red) state involves higher neuronal 

firing rate, on almost every neuron. 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint 29 

SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE 9

1130 

SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE 10

1135 

1140 

1145 

Supplementary Figure 9: Prediction of state activation from the neural population activity. 

For each subject, we show the accuracy of decoding states activation from the neural population 

activity, standardised across neurons, per trial and per time point, to rule out that specific 

subpopulations of neurons are preferentially indexed by the states. The standardisation step is 

needed to be sure that the average firing rate, instead of the relative activation of the neurons, is 

not driving the predictions. This is because the HPHT state generally involves higher firing rates 

for most neurons. The prediction accuracy is averaged over 100 repetitions of a class -balanced 

decoding procedure, and is here reported within its 95% CI. The accuracy typically around chance 

level indicates that the states do not selectively recruit different neurons within the population. 

Supplementary Figure 10 : States distribution with respect to trial outcome. For each subject, we 

show the probability of each state being active around response, for trials that have been successful 

(top row) or failed (bottom row). The states activation probability is computed as an average across 

trials (n indicates the number o f trials available), aligning trial data at response. Typically, the LPLT 

(yellow) state tends to be the most active during successful trials, while there is no t a clear state 

dominance during the failed trials. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE 1 11150 

SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE 1 2

1155 

1160 

1165 

1170 

Supplementary Figure 1 1: States distributions around task -relevant moments . Distributions around 

odor presentation (top row), response (middle row) and inter trial time (bottom row), for each subject. 

Supplementary Figure 12: Predicting trial outcome from head position. For each subject, 

shown the prediction accuracy of trial outcome from Xp and Yp coordinates, within its CI of 95% 

as obtained with 200 bootstraps to ensure class balance. Decoding accuracy is high especially 

after response, likely reflecting the licking -induced movement of rewarded trials. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 

SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE 1 3

1175 

SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE 14 

Supplementary Figure 1 3: Standard and shuffled decoding from deconfounded neural 

activity . Top row : For each subject, shown the prediction accuracy of trial outcome from the neural 

activity deconfounded for head motion (Xp and Yp coordinates), within its CI of 95% as obtained 

with 200 bootstraps to ensure class balance. For comparison, the decoding is performed also on 

deconfounded neural activity with shuffled trial outcome labels (cyan, 200 permutations, 95% CI), 

as expected at chance level. Bottom row: the difference between standard decoding performed 

on the original neural activity and on neural activity deconfounded for head motion. 

Supplementary Figure 1 4: Neural activity representing success vs fail across states . The 

plots show the difference in neural activity averaged across trials for successful minus failed 

trials, for those trials in state LPLT (top row), and in HPHT (middle row). The bottom row shows 

the absolute difference of the activity in the two higher p anels 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32 

SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE 1 5

1180 

Supplementary Figure 1 5: Within -state and cross -state decoding accuracy (signal filtered 

<100Hz). For each subject, shown the average decoding accuracy within -state (orange) and 

cross -state (purple) within their 95% CI (200 bootstraps to ensure class -balance) , with the states 

obtained by running the HMM on the low -pass filtered signal (sharp filter at 100Hz). If the number 

of trials for each state at any point is lower than 5 per class, the decoding is not performed (gaps 

in the plot) .

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

33 

SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE 16

1185 

1190 

1195 

1200 

1205 

SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE 17

1210 

Supplementary Figure 16: Decoding accuracy 

from simulated sets. The plot shows cross -

validated explained variance (CVEV) of simulated 

sets, encoding information with varying degrees of 

overlap. Reported the CVEV of within -set, cross -

set and standard decoding (i.e., decoding from both 

sets jointly, without distinguishin g between the 

two), averaged over 500 simulated sets for each 

value of the overlap degree (20 values between 0 

and 1). For values between 0 and 0.5 of the overlap 

degree (no overlap to 50% shared information 

encoded), within -set decoding works better than 

standard decoding and cross -set decoding 

performs much worse than both. For values 

between 0.6 and 1 of the overlap degree (1 

indicating identical encoding weights for the two 

sets), standard decoding surpasses within -set 

decoding, and the cross -set decoding performance 

is in creasingly higher. Between 0.7 and 0.8 of 

overlap degree lies the matching between these 

simulations and our experimental results .

Supplementary Figure 17: LFP data power spectrum of the 5 rats . Power spectrum of the 1 st 

principal component (PC) of the LFP data (high -pass filtered at 4Hz) for the five rats. Because of 

how different its power spectrum from the other rats was, Subject 5 was not included in th e main 

report. We have performed all the analyses on this animal, reported in Supplementary Figure 18 .

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 14, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.12.11.627908 doi: bioRxiv preprint

34 

SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE 18

Supplementary Figure 18: Analyses performed on subj 5 . The HMM analyses were performed 

with the exact same settings as in all the other subjects. A. States power spectra . The states capture 

general differences in power across the frequency spectrum , but there is no specific LPLT and HPHT 

states . B. States periodicity . Similar ly to all other subjects, the periodicity of the states peaks below 

2 Hz, meaning at most two states switch per second. C. States lifetimes . Both states have a similar 

lifetime distribution . D. Average firing rate per state . Similarly to the other subjects, the state 

associated with higher power typically involves a higher firing rate across neurons. E. State 

distribution around response . The state involving higher power across the frequency spectrum is the 

most active during successful trials, while there is no clear dominance for failed trials. F. Prediction 

of state activation from sta ndardised neural activity . Similarly to the other subjects, the prediction 

accuracy is typically around chance level, indicating that the state -neural activation relationship goes 

beyond the mere average firing rate . G. State -conditioned decoding . Within -state vs cross -state 

decoding accuracy. In some time points after response within -state accuracy is higher than cross -

state. The points where cross -state decoding accuracy is missing indicate timepoints where the 

number of trials for one state is not enough to perform decoding.  H.  Trial outcome prediction error 

(state -neuron interaction analysis). Like in the other subjects, also here the HMM states help better 

predicting trial outcome after response. I. States contribution to prediction of trial outcome . Shows 

the significance of the improved prediction accuracy when adding the HMM states as regressors in 

the prediction of trial outcome .