Title: Lack of Consensus for Manual Mouse Sleep Scoring Limits Implementation of Automatic Deep Learning Models

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.03.27.714381v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
Title :

# Lack of Consensus for Manual Mouse Sleep Scoring Limits 

# Implementation  of  Automatic  Deep Learning Models 

Authors :

Laura Rose 1, Alexander Neergaard Zahid 2, Javier García Ciudad 1, Christine Egebjerg 1, Louise Piilgaard 1,

Frederikke Lynge Sørensen 3, Mie Andersen 3, Tessa Radovanovic 3, Anastasia Tsopanidou 3, Maiken 

Nedergaard 3, S é  bastien Arthaud 4, Renato Maciel 4, Christelle Peyron 4, Chiara Berteotti 5, Viviana Lo 

Martire 5, Alessandro Silvani 5, Giovanna Zoccoli 5, Micaela Borsa 6,7 , Antoine Adamantidis 6,7 , Morten 

Mørup 2 and Birgitte Rahbek Kornum 1

1 Department of Neuroscience, University of Copenhagen, 

2 Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark, 

3 Center for Translational Neuroscience, University of Copenhagen 

4 Lyon Neuroscience Research Center, 

5 Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences,  Alma Mater Studiorum  - Università di Bologna 

6 Zentrum für Experimentelle Neurologie, Department of Neurology, Inselspital University Hospital 

Bern, Bern, Switzerland. 

7 Department of Biomedical Research, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland. 

Corresponding author: Birgitte R. Kornum, kornum@sund.ku.dk 

Author Contributions Statement: 

L.R. and B.R.K. got the idea for the study. L.R., A.N.Z., M.M. and B.R.K. designed the study. L.R., 

A.N.Z. and J.G.C. implemeted the deep learning models and performed data analysis. C.E., L.P., F.L.S., 

M.A., T.R., A.T., M.N., S.A., R.M., C.P., C.B., V.L.M ., A.S., G.Z., M.B., and A.A. collected mouse sleep 

data and performed data analysis. L.R. and B.R.K. wrote the manuscript. All authors reviewed and 

approved the manuscript. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.27.714381 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Keywords: 

Sleep; a utomatic sleep stage classification ; deep learning ; electroencephalography;  EEG ;

machine learning ; manual sleep scoring ; mice ; hypnodensity 

# Abstract 

Scientists have for decades attempted to automate the manual sleep staging problem not 

only for human polysomnography data but also for rodent data. No model  has, however, 

succeeded in fully replacing the manual procedure across  clinics and  laboratories. 

We hypothesize that  this  is  due to the models’ limited ability to generalize to data from 

unseen laboratories.  Our findings show that despite the high performance  of four state -of -

the -art models  reported in initial publications, the published models struggle to generalize 

to other laboratories. We  further show a  significant improve ment in  model performance 

across labs by re -training them on a diverse dataset  from five different  sites . To assess the 

contribution of variability in  manual scoring , ten  experts from five laboratories  all  labelled 

the same  nine  mouse sleep  recordings . The result  revealed  substantial scoring variability, 

particularly for rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, both within and bet ween labs. 

In conclusion our study demonstrates that  key challenges in the generalizability of state -of -

the -art sleep scoring models  are  signal variability and label noise. Our study highlights  the 

need for a standardized set of  mouse sleep  scoring guidelines to enable consistency and 

collaboration across the field. Until such  a consensus  is reached, we present four sufficiently 

robust models trained on diverse datasets that can serve as standardized tools  across labs .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.27.714381 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Introduction 

Mouse models are commonly used to study sleep due to the availability of tools that allow 

for genetic manipulation and sophisticated phenotyping. Like in humans, 

electroencephalogram (EEG) and electromyography (EMG) signals are used for classification 

of d ifferent vigilance states, and in mice these are typically divided into three stages: 

Wakefulness, NREM -sleep (NREMS), and REM -sleep (REMS). Although common sleep stage 

characteristics of mouse sleep, such as high delta power  (0.5 -4 Hz ) in NREMS and high t heta 

power  (6-10  Hz ) in REMS, are well established, inter -scorer variability still exists  [1 –3] . Unlike 

human sleep scoring, which follows the standardized guidelines of the American Academy of 

Sleep Medicine  [4] , there is no firm consensus for classifying wake and sleep stages in rodents 

[2] .

Manual sleep stage classification in mice is still the gold standard for sleep research, despite 

it being highly time -consuming.  This has  prompted many scientists to explore automation of 

sleep stage classification in mice. Using automatic sleep scoring algorithms would not only 

accelerate sleep study evaluation but more importantly streamline the process across labs by 

providing a standardi zed tool for sleep scoring, enabling direct comparisons of results across 

different laboratories. 

Variability in the EEG and EMG sleep signals presents a major challenge for automatic sleep 

stage classification. This variability arises both from biological and technical  variation  but 

likely also from label noise introduced by experts scoring sleep differently (subject bias). 

Technical variability reflects the wide range of experimental conditions across laboratories, 

as each lab typically uses unique hardware and recording setups ( e.g., different number of 

electrodes,  varying  locations of the electrodes  and different references). Even within a single 

lab, experiments vary due to biological factors in rodents such as genetic background, disease 

models, sex, and age. The label noise adds another layer of complexity, as a model will learn 

the specific scori ng patterns from the training data, which limits its generalizability across 

datasets. 

Researchers have applied v arious strategies to address this variability. Miladinovic et al. 

published the first deep learning model, SPINDLE, for mouse sleep staging in 2019  [1] . They 

argued that using a deep learning model would be a better way to approach the high 

variability rather than relying on handcrafted feature extraction and application of simple 

machine learning models as the high signal variability makes it challengin g to define robust 

features that generalize well. They successfully achieved a generalization agreement of 

97.39%, 93.21% and 97.47% in data cohorts of mutant mice generated from the same lab, of 

mice from an external lab, and of rats from an external lab,  respectively. Later, Barger et al., 

introduced the mixture z -scoring as a part of their sleep stage classification model (SS -ANN) 

[5] . This approach aimed to preserve variability arising from experimental manipulations but 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.27.714381 doi: bioRxiv preprint

corrected for the variability that arises from the signal acquisition  [5] . As opposed to 

Miladinovic et al., Barger et al. aimed to reduce the learnable parameters from 6.8M 

parameters as in SPINDLE to 20K parameters in SS -ANN while maintaining generalizability. 

However, although they reported a held -out performance of 95 -98%,  the held -out data partly 

consisted of recordings from mice that also were a part of the training, which most likely 

inflated the performance. 

Both SPINDLE and SS -ANN treat the sleep stage classification problem as an image 

classification task and use spectrograms for training the model. A different approach is to 

train a model on time -series EEG and EMG signals. This was applied i n two  other model s

generated by Grieger et al.  [3]  and Jha et al.  [6] . Griger et al.  further  used  data augmentation 

(i.e., through amplitude variability, frequency variability, EEG montage variability and time 

shift variability) to make their model robust to variations arising from data acquisition, 

scoring, and other unrelated physiological processes  [3] . However, Grieger et al. found that 

they achieved  better  performance by omitting the data augmentation when they tested the 

model on a held -out in -house dataset. Jha et al. also used data augmentation in their model, 

SlumberNet  based on the known ResNet model , and further attempted to obtain a robust 

classifier, that could work well across various sleep conditions by training a model on mice 

undergoing baseline sleep, sleep deprivation, and recovery sleep  [6] . They showed that the 

model could perform well on an in -house mouse dataset across similar conditions. However, 

the model was not  evaluated  on external data cohorts. 

As all four models originally were trained on data from a single laboratory  which could limit 

their generalizability to other labs. A lthough models trained and evaluated on the same in -

house datasets often achieve higher performance, this comes at the cost of reduced 

generalizabilit y. Additionally, it artificially raises the performance benchmark for new 

publications. In contrast, models trained on diverse datasets are more resistant to overfitting 

to a single lab. While this may lead to slightly lower performance on in -house data, it  is more 

likely to improve generalizability to  external datasets and ultimately provide a more valuable 

tool for the field. 

While much focus has been on signal variability, relatively little attention has been given to 

label noise stemming from variations in the manual labelling. Label noise introduces a ceiling 

effect on the performance of automatic sleep stage classification  models, making it a crucial 

factor to address  when  develop ing  robust and accurate sleep stage classification models. To 

address  this,  we collected a unique dataset where 10 experts (two experts from each lab) 

scored the same nine recordings, allowing us to  examine the within - and between -lab 

variability . Our results highlight the need for a standardized set of mouse sleep scoring 

guidelines. 

In conclusion we here demonstrate that training on diverse data from multiple labs and 

standardizing sleep scoring criteria across laboratories, rather than developing new models, 

is a critical first step towards fully automating sleep stage classification  for mice. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.27.714381 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Results 

State -of -the -art sleep stage classification models do not generalize well when tested on 

external datasets. 

We first investigated to what extent state -of -the -art models generalized to unseen data from 

different laboratories. For this we  chose the four state -of -the -art models described above 

(i.e., SPINDLE  [1] [5] , SS -ANN  [5] , Grieger  [3]  and SlumberNet  [6] ). These four baseline models 

were selected based on the three following criteria: 1) it is a deep learning -based model, 2) 

the input to the model uses at least one EEG channel, and 3) the original data is available 

online (allowing for reproduction of the  model).  Further, data from five different laboratories 

(Cohort A  – E) were collected resulting in a total of 83 wild -type (WT) mice with some mice 

having multiple recordings. Cohort A -E has previously been described in [1 2]. 

Each  model  was  tested on cohort A -E to evaluate the robustness for classifying sleep stages 

on data from various labs  (Figure 1) . Our results show that both SPINDLE (Wakefulness  -

Recall: 98.8%, 93.7%, 97.1%, 96.7%, 95.1% across labs) and SS -ANN (Wakefulness  - Recall: 

90.9%, 93.0%, 96.2%, 92.0%, 96.9% across labs) perform consistently well in detecting 

Wakefulness across laboratori es compared to Grieger (Wakefulness  – Recall: 56.4%, 95.8%, 

2.6%, 83.7%, 88.1%) and SlumberNet (Wakefulness  – Recall: 94.3%, 60. 3%, 83.7%, 36.7%, 

12.12%). Both SPINDLE, SS -ANN and SlumberNet struggle in detecting REMS (REMS recall 

SPINDLE: 84.1%, 60.9%, 55.8%, 66.9%, 50.3%; REMS recall SS -ANN: 76.9%, 62.2%, 33.4% 

51.1% and 77.5%; REMS recall SlumberNet 54.3%, 82%, 32.2%, 55.4%, 54. 2%). The Grieger 

model achieves a recall for REMS above 90% for 4/5 labs (Recall REMS: 92.0%, 66.0%, 94.8%, 

96%, 92.2%). A common trend across all models was that the sleep stage with the highest 

recall also  was the most likely stage to be classified , suggesting that the high recall likely 

resulted from a tendency to classify the majority of the epochs into that particular stage. Our 

analysis shows that state -of -the -art models that have been trained on data from a single lab 

display highly variable  perform ance  on data from other laboratories. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.27.714381 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 1. State -of -the -art -models do not generalize to external dataset.  Confusion matrices of different state -

of -the -art models tested across different laboratories (Lab 1 -5) with row -wise normalization (recall). X -axis 

reflects the predictions and y -axis the manual labels. SPINDLE and SS -ANN are both trained on images, while 

Grieger and SlumberNet are trained on sequences of time -series signals. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.27.714381 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 2: A flowchart illustrating three main experiments aimed at evaluating model performance across 

various scenarios:  Testing whether state -of -the -art models can generalize to external datasets (Baseline). 

Assessing the improvement in model performance when trained on a diverse (Fixed n) or a large  and  diverse 

dataset (All n). 

Models trained on a diverse dataset significantly improve performance when applied to 

unseen data. 

We aimed to address the generalization limitation of the state -of -the -art models by 

introducing a diverse training set from multiple laboratories, allowing the models to learn a 

broader range of scoring rules. We performed this in a leave -one -lab -out (LOLO ) approach 

such that the models were trained on data from four labs and tested on the fifth lab in a cross -

over fashion. 

To evaluate the effect of this approach, we compared the results of three experiments: 1) 

performance of the  baseline  models trained on the original data and tested on cohort A -E; 2) 

performance of  fixed n  models trained on diverse data (identical in size to original data) from 

four different labs and tested on data from the fifth lab ; and 3) performance of  all n  models 

trained on all data from four labs and tested on data from the fifth lab  (Figure  2).

To test the effect of a diverse and large sample, we used a linear model to correct for 

confounding factors: lab and  model . Our results demonstrate that training the models on a 

diverse dataset with a fixed sample size significantly improves overall performance when 

models were tested on unseen data (Figure 3; p -value 1.59 · 10 -6). Similarly, training on a large, 

diverse sample also showed improved performance (Figure 3; p -value 1.07 · 10 -6), with weight 

initialization accounted for in both cases. Although training on the diverse and large sample 

slightly improved model performance more than the diverse and fixed sample (Figure  3B; 

mean difference 0.0562 vs. 0.0572), the improvement between the fixed n (experiment 2) 

and all n (experiment 3) was not statistically significant . This demonstrates that  the diversity 

of the training dat a matters more than the size of the training set  when the goal is to achieve 

high generalizability of the model .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.27.714381 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 3: Having a diverse training sample significantly improve the state -of -the -art classifiers.  (A) The macro 

F1 -score (i.e., mean across sleep stages) for each experiment, lab and model. One sample represents the average 

macro F1 -score across five repeated training runs and the error -bar reflects the standard deviation. (B) Mean 

differences between  experimental groups, along with p -values and whether the null hypothesis could be 

rejected. 

Lack of consensus in manual sleep scoring within and between laboratories particularly for 

REMS. 

After observing the lack of generalizability of the state -of -the -art sleep scoring models, we 

decided to assess the label noise in manual scoring. To do so, we asked 10 experts, two from 

each lab, to manually annotate the same nine recordings.  An example of an annotated signal 

is shown in Figure 4A  The within -lab agreement was high for  Wakefulness (Figure 4 B; Cohen's 

kappa = 0.93, 0.95, 0.91, 0.94, 0.91) compared to NREMS that was slightly lower (Figure 4 B;

Cohen's kappa = 0.88, 0.94, 0.91, 0.91, 0.86), and  to REMS (Figure 4 B; Cohen's kappa = 0.78, 

0.93, 0.89, 0.90, 0.80), which showed the lowest agreement. The between -lab (i.e., experts 

from one lab were compared to experts from all other labs) agreement showed a similar 

pattern to the within -lab agreements (Figure 4 C; Wakefulness, Cohen's kappa = 0.90, 0.92, 

0.91, 0.91, 0.90; NREMS, Cohen's kappa = 0.87, 0.89, 0.89, 0.89, 0.87; REMS, Cohen's kappa = 

0.77, 0.87, 0.85, 0.86, 0.82).  While the between -lab agreement was slightly lower than the 

within -lab agreeme nt in all stages, the within -lab agreement highlights inconsistencies in 

scoring  even  between experts coming from the same lab. 

We further investigated how much the scoring variability affected downstream sleep analysis. 

Bout length analysis revealed that the average bout length varied more between experts than 

did  the total time spent in each sleep stage (Figure 4D -E), suggesting that much of the 

variability occurs at the start and end of each bout, which is supported by visual inspection of 

the hypnogram ( example in  Figure 4A) . Variability was also found within delta power during 

Wakefulness and within delta/theta power during REM S (Figure 4F). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.27.714381 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 4. Lack of consensus in manual sleep scoring, both within and between labs, particularly for REM sleep. 

(A) Hypnograms from 10 experts of a  three -minute  EEG / EMG sequence. (B) Within lab agreement (i.e.,  Cohen’s 

kappa was calculated between two experts from the same lab) for each sleep stage and each mouse resulting in 

nine samples per sleep stage. (C) Between lab agreement (i.e., experts from one lab  were  compared to all other 

experts from other labs; 16 samples) for each sleep stage. Each sample r eflects an average across recordings 

from five mice. Down -stream sleep analysis based on the manual labels from each of the 10 experts: (D) Average 

bout  length [sec] and (E) Total time spent in each state [%]. Each point in graph D and E represents one expert. 

(F) Power spectrums of the EEG for each sleep stage. Each line represents one expert. 

Manual label -derived hypnodensities show comparable macro sleep characteristics to 

those produced by the four fully trained deep learning models.  After training the four 

models on all data from the five labs, we tested the models on data consisting of  the  nine 

recordings manually  annotated  by the 10 experts. We found that the macro sleep structure 

based on the hypnodensities from the manual sleep scores and the four sleep scoring models 

was similar across most models in both the dark and light phases (Figure 5 ; Figure S1 -S4). 

Certain areas of the manual hypnodensity indicate a clear wake stage, while the deep learning 

models suggested brief wake -sleep mix ed  stages, which could be explained by the models 

being more likely to predict sleep stages (i.e., NREMS and REMS) compared to Wakefulness. 

This was further supported by calibration curves (Figure 5B: SPINDLE, SS -ANN, and Grieger), 

which showed that  the models  correctly  predict wakefulness when the  manual experts  also 

reached  a relatively high agreement on Wakefulness . In contrast, only a few experts  had to 

agree  on NREMS or REMS before  the models  predict ed  these stages with high certainty 

(Figure 5B: SPINDLE, SS -ANN, and Grieger). The calibration curve for the SlumberNet model 

indicated that  this model, in contrast to the other three,  was rat her conservative in predicting 

both NREM and REMS, despite high agreement among experts. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.27.714381 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 5: Hypnodensities derived from manual labels exhibit similar macro sleep characteristics to those 

generated by three of the four fully trained deep learning models.  (A) The manual hypnodensities were derived 

based on the  ten  experts ’ annotations for each mouse during dark phase and light phase. Hypnodensities based 

on the probability outputs from the fully trained SPINDLE, SS -ANN, Grieger and SlumberNet model. (B) 

Calibration  curves for SPINDLE, SS -ANN, Grieger and SlumberNet. The x -axis reflects an  aggregation of the 10 

sets of manual labels (e.g., 2/10 experts agreed on NREM for a given epoch, 8/10 agreed on Wake, resulting in 

a probability distribution of p(Wake) = 0.8, p(NREM) = 0.2, and p(REM) = 0) labelled as manual [%]. The y -axis 

reflects the  average fraction of epochs belonging to the sleep stage out of all epochs in the corresponding x -

label bin. The black dashed line shows the optimal calibration curve. 

# Discussion 

In this study, we show that state -of -the -art sleep scoring models ( when  trained on data from 

a single lab) fail to generalize to data from other labs. However, we demonstrate that 

retraining these models on a diverse dataset significantly enhances their performance on 

unseen data. Finally, we highlight a lack of consensus in  manual sleep scoring, particularly for 

REMS. 

Although several automatic sleep stage classification models report high performance: 

SPINDLE with 99±0.5% accuracy  [1] , SS -ANN at 96.8%  [5] , Grieger with an F1 -score of 0.95  [3] ,

and SlumberNet at 97% accuracy  [6] , none of them perform consistently well across external 

laboratories (Figure  1). This inconsistency could come from signal variability or label noise. 

Furthermore, both SS -ANN and SlumberNet face the issue of information leakage (i.e., 

training and testing on the same mice), which can compromise the model's generalizability 

and arti ficially inflate performance metrics. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.27.714381 doi: bioRxiv preprint

When comparing the four models, SS -ANN is the only model that requires a few manually 

labelled  epochs to calculate a standardized z -score, making it less flexible compared to 

SPINDLE and Grieger. Unlike the other models, SlumberNet does not include  neighbouring 

epochs in its sequences, preventing it from leveraging contextual information. This absence 

of context could be one reason for its lower performance compared to the others, which use 

sequences of 20, 44, and 30 seconds for SPINDLE, SS -ANN, and Griege r, respectively. SPINDLE 

may offer more explainability, as it uses spectrograms instead of raw signal sequences as 

input. This approach allows for easier post -hoc explainability techniques to identify sleep 

markers and understand the rationale behind model  predictions. 

This trend of inflated performance has substantial implications for the field, as new models 

are typically expected to outperform established ones. Instead of focusing solely on 

performance within a single dataset, it may be more meaningful to evaluate mod el 

robustness across datasets, providing a better indication of real -world applicability.  Another 

issue is that studies often report accuracy as the primary performance metric, which may not 

adequately capture generalizability. A high accuracy can be achie ved by overclassifying the 

majority class, obscuring the actual model performance. Metrics such as the F1 -score or 

balanced accuracy could provide a more accurate picture. 

In this study, we re -trained four state -of -the -art models on data from five different 

laboratories, with the goal of creating more robust classifiers.  By training  all models on the 

same data,  we  revealed  differences in how they classify sleep. For SPINDLE, SS -ANN, and 

Grieger, a strong agreement across expert labels correspond ed  with high prediction certainty 

from the models. In contrast, SlumberNet struggle d to achieve high certainty, as reflected in 

the hypnodensities, which show more mixed -stage predicti ons compared to the other models 

(Figure  5). SPINDLE, SS -ANN, and Grieger tend ed  to underestimate Wakefulness and 

overestimate sleep stages, potentially due to how the weighted loss function penalizes less 

frequent sleep stages more heavily, forcing the models to learn NREMS and REMS.  Our results 

suggest that depending on the purpose of a given study , different models offer different 

advantages. An ensemble approach utilizing several models could also be considered, as the 

calibration curves indicate that s ome models overestimate NREMS while others overestimate 

REMS. Combining models may lead to more robust predictions and improve overall 

performance. 

Our study raises the question of h ow we  can  expect the automatic sleep scoring models to 

generalize well, when  manual  labelling  adds  label  noise  to  the data?  We here show that 

training the models on a diverse dataset significantly improves the state -of -the -art model 

performance (Figure 3). However, diversity in the dataset (i.e., data from different labs) also 

means incorporating different sets of scoring rules , which may confuse the model. For 

example, one lab might classify most NREMS to REMS sleep transition epochs as NREMS, 

while another lab may  label them as REMS. Thus, the lack of consensus for manual sleep 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.27.714381 doi: bioRxiv preprint

scoring (Figure 4B -C), makes it difficult to develop a standardized tool that will be applicable 

to every laboratory. 

EEG and EMG signals alone hold a considerable amount of variability, making them inherently 

challenging for models to learn. Adding label noise and lab -to -lab differences in data 

acquisition only makes the sleep staging problem more difficult. Although sev eral labs report 

similar scoring criteria ( Supplementary  Table  1), disagreements  persist  (Figure 4B -C). This 

discrepancy may arise, in part, because experts not only rely on the signals but also frequently 

use the video of the mouse during scoring.  In this study we focused on manual and automatic 

sleep stage classification of the three main sleep stages (i.e., Wakefulness, NREMS and REMS). 

Artifacts is another class that is handled very differently across laboratories.  To advance the 

field, a discussion  is  needed on how to handle epochs where experts deviate from standa rd 

scoring criteria. Thus, the initial steps in automating sleep scoring may lie not in model 

development but in standardizing scoring criteria and hardware setups across laboratories to 

reduce these sources of variability, particularly during REMS. 

In manual sleep staging, each epoch is assigned a discrete sleep stage (Wakefulness, NREMS, 

or REMS  for mice ). However, if a sleep stage is  a mix of two stages, such as during transitions 

or in disease models like narcolepsy, it is not possible to represent this mixture without 

introducing new classes such as intermediate classes. With automatic sleep stage 

classification models, each epoch can  be assigned a probability of belonging to multiple 

stages. However, model uncertainty is embedded within these pro babilities, making it 

challenging to distinguish model uncertainty from biologically mixed stages.  The graphical 

representation of sleep stage probabilities is called a hypnodensity  [7] . This visual depiction 

of model uncertainties and mixed stages , which  should become standard in the sleep field , is 

only possible with either a mix of  labels  from many experts or with automatic models, 

highlighting the additional information gained from using automatic sleep stage classification 

models. 

Because we collected manual scores from 10 experts, we can examine whether areas of high 

uncertainty in the manual hypnodensity align with the mixed stages predicted by the model .

Such mixed stages could be due to technical  noise but  could also represent biological 

meaningful mixed sleep stages.  Future experiments  sh ould explore ways to distinguish model 

noise from biological mixed stages. This would potentially allow us to derive biomarkers from 

the hypnodensities in disease models. 

# Methods 

Data collection overview 

The work presented here is divided into three parts, each answering a different question: 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.27.714381 doi: bioRxiv preprint

1) Validation study: How well does the state -of -the -art sleep staging models generalize to 

unseen data? 

2) Optimization study: To what extent can we improve the generalizability of the state -of -the -

art models by training on a (larger and) more diverse dataset? 

3) Consensus study: How consistent are the manual scores among experts within and 

between labs? 

For the first two parts, data from five different laboratories (Cohort A -E) were collected 

resulting in a total of 83 wild -type (WT) mice with some mice having multiple recordings. For 

the third study, two EEG/EMG recordings were collected from five WT mice and scored by 10 

experts from five different laboratories. An overview  of the data is presented in Table 1.                                            

> Cohort Number of
> mice
> EEG EMG Number
> of epochs
> Scored by
> n experts
> A-lab 1 10 11619534 1
> B-lab 2 17 41184500 1
> C-lab 3 23 21885404 1
> D-lab 4 28 1174546 1
> E-lab 5 521194307 1
> F52124300 10

Table 1:  Data overview. 

Cohort A -E has previously been described [1 2], while Cohort F is unique to this paper and 

described below. All analyses were performed using either Python or MATLAB 2023b, 

depending on the programming language of the original model. The specific environments, 

including package versions, are detailed  in the supplementary materials for each model 

(suppl. data S1 -S3). 

All four fully trained models have been made available online https://github.com/laulaurose. 

Data collected specifically for this study ( Cohort F )

We acquired EEG/EMG recordings from five young adult female mice (nine weeks old, 

C57BL/6JTac mice). EEG/EMG surgery was performed as described in Egebjerg et al.  [8]  with 

a two -EEG and one -EMG channel head -mount (#8201; Pinnacle Tech. Inc., KS, USA). Three 

days before the recordings, the mice were habituated to a 10” circular transparent recording 

cage (#9000 -K20; Pinnacle Tech. Inc., KS, USA) with a video camera attached outside the cage. 

Four of the five m ice had two EEG/EMG/video recordings each (one during the light phase 

and one during the dark phase), each lasting three hours. Due to muscle artifacts disrupting 

the EEG signal, the light phase recording was excluded for the fifth mouse, resulting in a to tal 

of 9 recordings  (five dark phase and four light phase)  included for scoring. 

This data was distributed to five laboratories, where two experts from each lab annotated the 

recordings, resulting in 10 independent scorings per recording. Sleep stages: Wakefulness, 

NREMS, and REMS were scored by the experts, following local scoring gui delines as 

summarized in  Supplementary  Table  1. The  scoring guideline for our lab  are presented  in 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.27.714381 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Table  2). Most laboratories scored standard sleep stages and artifacts, however, one 

laboratory also classified intermediate states (epochs showing characteristics of two states 

simultaneously). 

Wake  Video  The mouse appears awake by displaying movement or other  activities .

EMG  Mixed EMG signal with bursts of high amplitude. 

EEG  Low amplitude, mix of faster frequencies (>6Hz). Low frequencies in EEG 

can occur when feeding or other rhythmic activities (use video if in 

doubt). 

NREMS  Video  The mouse is usually in the  nest,  but NREMS can occur outside of nest. 

EMG  Low EMG amplitude 

EEG  High amplitude, low frequency EEG activity dominated by delta (0.5 -4

Hz) in the spectrogram. 

REMS  Video  In wild type mice, the mouse is most likely in the nest. Small ear 

movements can be observed during  REMS but  can only be used when 

scoring if in doubt of REMS. 

EMG  Low EMG amplitude with occasional twitches 

EEG  Theta dominated EEG activity (6 -10 Hz). Can contain slower frequencies 

but to a lesser  extent  than theta. Continuous for more than three epochs 

(12 sec). 

Table 2 . Scoring guideline for sleep stages from our lab 

Reproduction of d eep learning models and preprocessing pipelines 

We reproduced four state -of -the -art deep learning models (i.e., baseline models; Figure 1) 

and tested the model performance in cohort A -E. The models are briefly explained along with 

the preprocessing pipeline below. We have used the same preprocessing pip eline and model 

architecture as reported in the original papers, unless otherwise specified. 

Each baseline model was reproduced by training the model on its original dataset 

(Supplementary Table 2 ). To eliminate the effect of random weight initialization, the models 

were each reproduced five times using different random initializations. If the model weights 

were available online, we used it as the “baseline” model for testing. Otherwise, we selected 

the model that most closely matched the performance reported in the paper. These models 

were then used to test the performance on external data cohorts (cohort A -E). We chose the 

same hyperparameters (i.e., learning rate, batch size, and number of epochs) a s originally 

reported in the papers. 

SPINDLE 

The SPINDLE model  [1]  originally consists of two convolutional neural networks (CNN), one 

for sleep staging and one for artifact detection. The framework further involves an integration 

of a Hidden Markov Model (HMM) as a post -hoc analysis to the CNN for sleep staging. The 

HMM  serves as a model that corrects for biological infeasible transitions such as Wakefulness 

to REMS. Since most laboratories did not score artifacts, training a second CNN for artifact 

detection was not feasible. Furthermore, as our goal is to evaluate the  performance of sleep 

classification models without post hoc modifications that could artificially enhance results, 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.27.714381 doi: bioRxiv preprint

only the sleep staging CNN was relevant to our study. Thus, moving forward, the SPINDLE 

model exclusively refers to the CNN classifier for sleep staging. 

The SPINDLE model uses two EEG channels and one EMG channel. In cases where only one 

EEG channel was available, the same EEG would be used twice. Both signals were resampled 

to 128 Hz before applying the short -time Fourier transform to obtain spectrograms.  The EEG 

spectrograms were bandpass filtered, log -scaled and standardized per frequency component. 

For the EMG spectrogram the PSD was summed within 0.5 -30 Hz yielding a 1d array that was 

replicated to fit the dimension of the EEG spectrograms. The multi -channel EEG and EMG 

were concatenated and segmented into periods of five epochs, such that the epoch of interest 

was  centred .

SS -ANN 

SS -ANN uses one EEG channel and one EMG channel. In cases where more than one EEG 

channel was available, random sampling was used to choose an electrode. Both signals were 

down -sampled to 128 Hz. The EEG signal was Fourier transformed to obtain spectrograms 

that were further down -sampled by a factor of two between 20 -50 Hz for parameter 

reduction purposes. The EMG signal was bandpass  filtered,  and the root mean square (rms) 

was calculated for each epoch yielding a 1d array that was repeated nine times. The 

spectrogram (176 x n) was concatenated with the rms of the EMG signal (9 x n) resulting in 

185 features per epoch, with n representing seque nces of 9 epochs with the epoch of interest 

centred . The features were further standardized with the mixture z -score, as reported in  [5] .

Grieger model 

In contrast to other models, the Grieger model aims to classify additional stages such as pre -

REM sleep and artifacts based on a single EEG channel  [3] . Here, we refer to a modified 

version of the Grieger model, which only classifies the three main stages: Wakefulness, 

NREMS, and REMS. Additionally, we did not use the data augmentation approaches from the 

original paper  as this was shown to decrease model performance . Finally, rather than 

artificially rebalancing the training set, we rebalanced the training data through a weighted 

loss function.  The data was low -pass filtered with a cutoff frequency of 25.6 Hz, down -

sampled to 64 Hz, and z -scored per reco rding. The input to the model was a signal segment 

of 30 seconds, with the epoch of interest at the  centre  of the segment. 

SlumberNet 

SlumberNet  [6]  uses one EEG and one EMG channel. The signals were first split into sequences 

of one epoch. Each epoch was later down -sampled to 64 Hz and the EMG signal was 

additionally high -pass filtered (cutoff frequency of 16 Hz) and further baseline -corrected as 

noted in  [6] . A few modifications were added to the model. We identified a reshaping error 

in the original paper, where the input was incorrectly formed by concatenating two sets of 2 -

second EEG and 2 -second EMG signals, instead of the intended 4 -second EEG and 4 -seco nd 

EMG signals as described. We have since corrected this mistake and implemented the 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.27.714381 doi: bioRxiv preprint

intended 4 -second input format. Additionally, we added a standardization step to the 

preprocessing pipeline to address differences in signal acquisition across labs (e.g., variations 

in electrode placement and hardware), which can impact the signal amplitu de. For each lab, 

we computed the overall mean and standard deviation of all epochs. We then standardized 

each epoch by subtracting the mean and dividing by the lab -specific standard deviation. 

Training the models on a diverse dataset 

By leveraging data from five different labs, the models were trained using a  leave -one -lab -out 

(LOLO ) approach, resulting in five distinct models, with each left -out lab serving as the test 

set ( Supplementary Table 2 ). We further investigated how much the models would benefit 

from being trained on a diverse and large dataset (i.e., all n; Figure  2). As a final step we 

trained all four sleep staging classifiers on all data and validated their performance using an 

external dataset (Cohort F). 

In  a fixed n experiment, the sample size was fixed to that of the original model, but the dataset 

was replaced with a more diverse dataset (cohorts A –E). To ensure that each lab contributed 

with an equal amount of data while keeping the original sample size  N0, the following 

stratification was used. Data from each lab was first split into a training (i.e., 80%) and 

validation set (i.e., 20%; Figure  2).  For the validation set: if  𝑁 𝑙𝑎𝑏 ,𝑣𝑎𝑙 ,𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒  > 𝑁 0·0.8 

> 4

· 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔 𝑒 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 

(where  𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔 𝑒 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜  = 𝑙𝑎 𝑏 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒  𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒 

> 𝑛 𝑙𝑎𝑏

) the data would be downsampled by random sampling of 

𝑁 𝑙𝑎𝑏 ,𝑣𝑎𝑙 ,𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒 . For the training set:  if  𝑁 𝑙𝑎𝑏 ,𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑖𝑛 ,𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔𝑒  > 𝑁 0·0.8 

> 4

· 𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑔 𝑒 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 , the data would be random 

sampled, else it would be upsampled.  The models were trained with a weighted loss function  to 

balance classes. As for the baseline models, the LOLO training was repeated five times to take 

different weight initializations into account. 

Next , using the same LOLO framework,  we allowed the models to utilize all available training 

data from each cohort. The data was split for each lab into a training and validation set in an 

80% -20% ratio. We applied the same weighted loss function as in previous experiments. 

However, given the  varying contributions of data from each lab, the weights further 

accounted for both imbalanced cohort sizes and differences in sleep stage distributions. Each 

model was trained five times per lab, resulting in a total  of 25 models (i.e., five runs per 

model). 

As a final step, we trained all four models (i.e., SPINDLE, SS -ANN, Grieger and SlumberNet) on 

all data (cohort A -E)  without leaving any lab out , to obtain four final models. 

Addressing  within and between lab variability 

To assess the manual sleep scoring agreement both within and between labs, Cohen’s  𝜅  [9] 

was used as a metric to reflect the agreement both within and between labs. Cohen’s  𝜅  is 

based on true positives (TP), true negatives (TN), false negatives (FN) and false positives (FP): 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.27.714381 doi: bioRxiv preprint

𝜅  = 2 (𝑇𝑃 ×𝑇𝑁 −𝐹𝑁 ×𝐹𝑃 )

> (𝑇𝑃 +𝐹𝑃 )(𝐹𝑃 +𝑇𝑁 )+(𝑇𝑃 +𝐹𝑁 )(𝐹𝑁 +𝑇𝑁 )

.

We calculated Cohen’s  𝜅  for each sleep stage and then averaged across stages for each 

mouse. For the within -lab analysis, two experts were compared for each mouse. To assess 

the between -lab agreement, we compared the agreement between lab i and the remaining 

four labs. Thus, for  a single study, the sleep scoring from expert 1 from lab 1 was compared 

with all experts excluding expert 2 from lab 1. This was repeated for expert 2 from lab 1 

resulting in 16 comparisons. We then computed the average agreement across all mice 

yielding  16 samples for comparison. To examine the effect of the sleep scoring variability on 

downstream analysis, we calculated features such as EEG power, average bout length, and 

the total time spent in each sleep stage for each set of sleep annotations. We used  Welch's 

method with a window size of 4 seconds (SciPy 1.7.3  [10] ) to compute the power spectrums. 

For the bout analysis, the total time spent in each stage was calculated as the total time spent 

in that stage as a fraction of total time spent in all stages, and the average bout length was 

calculated in seconds. 

Comparing m anual  vs. automatic  sleep stage classification 

For each mouse, we converted the 10 sets of expert labels into a probability matrix, such that 

if 2/10 experts agreed on NREMS for a given epoch and 8/10 agreed on Wakefulness, the 

resulting probability distribution would be  p(wakefulness) = 0.8,  p(NREMs) = 0.2, and  p(REM) 

= 0). We used these probability matrices, along with the probability outputs from the four 

fully trained deep learning models, to compute calibration curves for each model and each 

sleep stage. The calibration curves were derived by count ing the number of epochs correctly 

classified as the actual sleep stage within that manual probability bin and dividing it by the 

total number of epochs in that bin. 

Statistics 

We have used the macro F1 -score to evaluate the performance of all automatic sleep stage 

classifiers, where 

𝐹 1𝑚𝑎𝑐𝑟𝑜  = 𝐹 1𝑊  + 𝐹 1𝑁𝑅𝐸𝑀  + 𝐹 1𝑅𝐸𝑀 

3 ,

𝐹 1 = 2 𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛  ⋅ 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙 

𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛  + 𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙  ,

𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛  = 𝑇𝑃 

𝑇𝑃  + 𝐹𝑃 ,

𝑅𝑒𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑙  = 𝑇𝑃 

𝑇𝑃  + 𝐹𝑁 .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.27.714381 doi: bioRxiv preprint

As we ran all three experiments five times for each model, we obtained 15 sets of predictions 

for each lab and model. To examine whether it helps the automatic sleep scoring models to 

learn a more diverse set of scoring rules, we tested the null hypotheses 

𝐻 0: 𝜇 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒  = 𝜇 𝑓𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑑  = 𝜇 𝑎𝑙𝑙 

𝐻 1: 𝜇 𝑏𝑎𝑠𝑒𝑙𝑖𝑛𝑒  ≠ 𝜇 𝑓𝑖𝑥𝑒𝑑  ≠ 𝜇 𝑎𝑙𝑙 .

We fitted a linear model to account for confounding factors (i.e., lab and model), 

𝐹 1 = 𝜇  + 𝛼 𝑖  + 𝛽 𝑗  + 𝛾 𝑘  + 𝜀 𝑖𝑗𝑘 ,

where  𝜇  represents the overall mean,  𝛼 𝑖  the effect of the model,  𝛽 𝑗  the effect of the lab, and 

𝛾 𝑘  the effect of the experiment. We used the OLS function from statsmodel  [11]  to fit the 

linear model. We also investigated a model with interaction terms, but did not observe any 

statistical difference. 

# Data availability statement 

The datasets generated and/or analysed during the current study are available in the 

Openneuro  repository,  https://openneuro.org/datasets/ds006366 

# Funding 

LR, CE and BRK was funded by the Lundbeck Foundation ( R344 -2020 -749 ).  ANZ was funded 

by the Lundbeck Foundation (R347 -2020 -2439). 

# References 

1.  Miladinović et al. SPINDLE: End -to -end learning from EEG/EMG to extrapolate animal sleep 

scoring across experimental settings, labs and species. PLoS Comput Biol (2019) 15:1 –30. 

doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006968 

2.  Bastianini et al. Recent developments in automatic scoring of rodent sleep. Arch Ital Biol 

(2015) 153: doi:10.12871/000398292015231 

3.  Grieger et al. Automated scoring of pre -REM sleep in mice with deep learning. Sci Rep (2021) 

11: doi:10.1038/S41598 -021 -91286 -0

4.  Troester et al. The AASM manual for the scoring of sleep and associated events : rules, 

terminology and technical specifications. (2023) 

5.  Barger et al. Robust, automated sleep scoring by a compact neural network with distributional 

shift correction. PLoS One (2019) 14: doi:10.1371/JOURNAL.PONE.0224642 

6.  Jha et al. SlumberNet: deep learning classification of sleep stages using residual neural 

networks. Sci Rep (2024) 14: doi:10.1038/S41598 -024 -54727 -0

7.  Stephansen et al. Neural network analysis of sleep stages enables efficient diagnosis of 

narcolepsy. Nat Commun (2018) 9:1 –15. doi:10.1038/s41467 -018 -07229 -3

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.27.714381 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8.  Egebjerg et al. Introduction of novel objects to the home cage of mice repeatedly disturbs 

sleep for seven days with minimal stress induction. npj Biological Timing and Sleep 2025 2:1 

(2025) 2:1 –10. doi:10.1038/s44323 -025 -00027 -3

9.  McHugh. Interrater reliability: The kappa statistic. Biochem Med (Zagreb) (2012) 22:276 –282. 

doi:10.11613/BM.2012.031/FULLARTICLE 

10.  Virtanen et al. SciPy 1.0: fundamental algorithms for scientific computing in Python. Nature 

Methods 2020 17:3 (2020) 17:261 –272. doi:10.1038/s41592 -019 -0686 -2

11.  Seabold et al. Statsmodels: Econometric and Statistical Modeling with Python. scipy (2010)92 –

96. doi:10.25080/MAJORA -92BF1922 -011 

12. Rose, L.  et al.  Probability estimation of narcolepsy type 1 in DTA mice using 

unlabeled EEG and EMG data ( Resubmitted ). Sleep Advances. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.27.714381 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Supplementary figures and information Rose et al. 

List of supplementary materials 

Figure S1 . Hypnodensity plots from 2 x 3 -hour recording of a single mouse, generated using manual 

labels and predictions from the four fully trained models. 

Figure S2 . Hypnodensity plots from 2 x 3 -hour recording of a single mouse, generated using manual 

labels and predictions from the four fully trained models. 

Figure S3 . Hypnodensity plot s from a 3 -hour recording of a single mouse, generated using manual 

labels and predictions from the four fully trained models. 

Figure S4 . Hypnodensity plots from 2 x 3 -hour recording of a single mouse, generated using manual 

labels and predictions from the four fully trained models 

Supplementary Table 1 : An overview of the scoring criteria of Wakefulness, NREMS, and REMS for 

each lab. 

Supplementary Table 2 : Overview of the different experiments that were conducted 

Further provided 

Environment.txt file for SPINDLE model 

Environment.txt file for Griger model 

Environment.txt file for SlumberNet model 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.27.714381 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure S1 . Hypnodensity plots from 2 x 3 -hour recording of a single mouse, generated using manual 

labels and predictions from the four fully trained models. 

Figure S2 . Hypnodensity plots from 2 x 3 -hour recording of a single mouse, generated using manual 

labels and predictions from the four fully trained models. 

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.27.714381 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure S3 . Hypnodensity plots from 3 -hour recording of a single mouse, generated using manual labels 

and predictions from the four fully trained models. 

Figure S4 . Hypnodensity plots from 2 x 3 -hour recording of a single mouse, generated using manual 

labels and predictions from the four fully trained models 

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.27.714381 doi: bioRxiv preprint Supplementary Table 1:  An overview of the scoring criteria of Wakefulness, NREMS, and REMS for 

each lab. 

Wakefulness  NREMS  REMS 

EEG  EMG  EEG  EMG  EEG  EMG 

Cohort A  Low voltage 

with possible 

delta (0.5 -4 Hz) 

and theta (6 -9

Hz) frequency 

components 

High EMG 

tone 

EEG at high 

voltage with 

prominent 

delta (0.5 -4

Hz) frequency 

components 

EMG tone 

lower than in 

wakefulness 

EEG at low 

voltage with 

predominant 

theta (6 -9 Hz) 

frequency 

components 

EMG 

indicating 

muscle 

atonia with 

occasional 

muscle 

twitches 

Cohort B  Periods with low 

amplitude 

desynchronized 

EEG signals 

High, tonic 

EMG 

activity 

containing 

phasic 

bursts 

Synchronized, 

high 

amplitude 

oscillations in 

the slow (<1 

Hz) and delta 

(1 -4 Hz) band 

Low EMG 

tone without 

bursts 

Pronounced 

theta (5 -10 Hz) 

oscillations or 

an increased 

amount of 

desynchronized 

and high -

frequency 

oscillation 

Almost 

complete 

absence of 

EMG tone 

except short 

twitches 

Cohort C  Low voltage; 

mixed 

frequency θ (6 -

10 Hz), alpha (8 -

14Hz), beta (15 -

30Hz) and 

gamma (30 -

120Hz) 

High 

amplitude 

High 

amplitude 

low 

frequency 

EEG activity δ 

(0.5 -4 Hz) 

Low EMG 

amplitude 

Low voltage 

fast EEG 

activity; theta 

dominated 

activity θ (6 -10 

Hz) 

Low EMG 

amplitude 

with 

occasional 

muscle 

twitches 

Cohort D  Low EEG 

amplitude. Low 

Fast Fourier 

Transform (FFT) 

magnitude 

across all 

frequency bands 

< 30 Hz 

High EMG 

amplitude 

with phasic 

events 

High 

amplitude 

with high FFT 

magnitude in 

delta range 

(0.5 -4 Hz) 

relative to the 

other 

frequency 

bands 

Low 

amplitude 

relative to 

that in 

wakefulness 

without 

phasic 

events 

Low amplitude 

with relatively 

high FFT 

magnitude in 

theta range (4 -

8 Hz) compared 

to other bands 

Low 

amplitude 

relative to 

wakefulness 

but with 

muscle 

twitches 

Cohort E  Desynchronized 

(activated) low -

amplitude EEG 

Tonic and 

phasic EMG 

activity 

High -voltage 

slow -waves 

(0.5 -4Hz) 

Loss of 

phasic EMG 

activity with 

low EMG 

tone 

Regular and 

pronounced 

theta rhythm 

(6 -9Hz) on 

parietal EEG 

Absence of 

phasic and 

tonic EMG 

activity, 

except short 

twitches 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.27.714381 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Supplementary Table 2:  Overview of the different experiments that were conducted with 

specifications of the sample size and dataset that served as either training or test set. The table only 

lists experiments for one model (SPINDLE). The same strategy was used for all four mode ls. 

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 30, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.27.714381 doi: bioRxiv preprint