Title: 13676237

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 67

Markdown Content:
1

Salvianolic acids  are natural senolytics  and increase  life span in 

old age 

Hongwei Zhang 1,  #, Zhirui Jiang 1,  2,  #, Qiang Fu 3, Qixia Xu 1, 2 , Halidan Wufuer 2,

Shuangbai Zhou 4, Qingfeng Li 4, * , Guilong Zhang 3, * , James L. Kirkland 5, * and Yu 

Sun 1,  2,  3, *

Author affiliations 

1.  Center for Single -Cell Omics, School of Public Health, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of 

Medicine, Shanghai, 200025, China 

2.  CAS Key Laboratory of Tissue Microenvironment and Tumor,  Shanghai Institute of Nutrition and 

Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China 

3.  School of Pharmacy , Institute of Aging Medicine,  Shandong Medical and Pharmacological 

University, Yantai, Shandong 264003, China 

4.  Department of Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery, Shanghai Ninth People’s Hospital, Shanghai 

Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200011, China 

5.  Center for Advanced Gerotherapeutics, Cedars -Sinai Medical Center, Pacific Design Center, 

West Hollywood, CA 90069, USA; Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Cedars -

Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA  

> #

These authors contributed equally. 

* Correspondence:  dr.liqingfeng@shsmu.edu.cn ; glzhang@bzmc.edu.cn;  James.Kirkland@cshs.org; 

sunyu@sinh.ac.cn .

Abs tract 

Cellular senescence plays a critical role in  chronological  aging and is implicated in 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 2

the onset and progression of  multiple  age -related dis order s. Targeting senescent 

cells  represents  a promising strategy to reduce disease burden and  improve 

healthspan.  Here  we  report  the seno therapeutic  properties of salvianolic acid (SA) 

family members, specifically A (SAA), B (SAB) and E (SAE).  From  a natural 

medicinal  agent  library , we identified  selective cytotoxicity  of  these SA compounds 

again st senescent cells across diverse senescence types and cell lineages. 

Mechanistically, SAA, SAB and SAE enhance  ROS  production  and  target 

glutathione S -transferase Pi1 (GSTP1),  a redox homeostasis modulator,  inducing 

both  apoptosis and ferroptosis  in  senescent cells.  Incorporation of SA s into 

chemotherapeutic regimens  enhanced  anticancer efficacy and prolonged post -

treatment survival.  Intermittent  SA  administration improved physical function and 

increase d healthspan and  lifespan in aged  mice . Collectively, our  study establishe s

SAs  as  an emerging  class of natural senolytics  (phenolic acids)  with  the  capacity  to 

delay aging and  alleviat e age -related  pathologie s in  advanced life .

Introduction 

Significant improvements  in  living conditions, development of public health and 

advances in  modern  medicine have  foster ed  an unprecedented increase  in  median 

life expectancy worldwide.  As a major risk factor for  human health , a ging  represents 

a time -dependent  and  systemic  decline  of  organ  function  that  underl ies  the  rise in 

age -related conditions , including cardiovascular diseases, metabolic disorders, 

neurodegenerative symptoms and various malignancies , a geriatric syndrome 

termed  multimorbidity  1, 2 . More than 30% of adults suffer from multimorbidity, with 

the  prevalence rising among  elderly  populations, particularly in low - and middle -

income countries  3. Identification of mechanisms  shared by multimorbidities  and 

development of evidence -based interventions  is  becom ing  the main stay  of aging -

related studies.  It is increasingly evident  that addressing fundamental aging 

processes  as a whole, rather than  targeting  individual  pathologies,  may be  a more 

effective strategy  for  reduc ing  age -related multi morbidities as a group  to  improv e

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 3

the  healthspan  in  aging  population s 4, 5 .

Cellular senescence, a hallmark of aging, is a cell state characterized by stable 

cell  cycle arrest  first described in 1961 by Hayflick and Moorehead  6. Senescent 

cells arise in response to various  inherent and/or environmental stimuli  including 

telomeric attrition  or dysfunction , DNA damage, oncogene activation, metabolic 

stress,  cytotoxic  chemotherapy and ionizing radiation  7, 8 . Senescence is beneficial 

in  a few  patho physiological  cases , such as  embryogenic patterning,  tissue  repair ,

wound  healing  and  tumorigenesis  prevention  2. However, senescent cells  lingering 

in the tissue microenvironment  of an aged host  are  mostly  harmful  through  the ir 

senescence -associated secretory phenotype (SASP) , which  contribut es  to  multiple 

pathological  conditions  throughout  the lifespan  and  elevates  age -related  morbidity 

and  mortality  9.

Senescent cells  are  intrinsic ally  resistant to  programmed  cell death , although 

subject to  in vivo  surveillance and  remov al  by immune  cells  10 . However,  in the case 

of a  dysfunctional  immune  system,  senescent cells can  accumulate  and  promote 

geriatric syndromes including frailty, cognitive dysfunction  and immobility , and  caus e

reduced  physical resilience  such as  impaired recovery after infection or trauma  11 .

Therapeutic  agents  that  selectively remove senescent cells, termed as senolytics, 

and drugs that  attenuate  the SASP,  namely  senomorphics, are  being  actively 

developed as a  strategy to  delay, prevent  or  alleviate age -related disorders .

Activation of senescent cell anti -apoptotic pathway s (SCAP s) has been recognized 

as a major mechanism regulating inherent resistance  of senescent cells  to death 

and an effective target  for eliminat ing  these cells  12, 13 . To date, a handful of senolytic 

agents  have been  identified  or de veloped  with the potential  to  mitigate  geriatric 

dis eases  11, 14 . Results from pilot clinical trials involving senolytics  indicate  the  safety, 

tolerability  and  feasibility  of  reduc ing  senescent cell  burden  in human  patients  15 -18 ,

al though  much more remains to be done to  validate  the  use o f senolytics. 

Naturally derived senolytics,  specifically  phytochemical compounds display ing 

senolytic activit y, are being  pursued , mainly  due to their  relatively  high safety and 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 4

low toxicity, but  are scarce in nature.  Salvia miltiorrhiza  (S. miltiorrhiza ), a perennial 

plant belonging to the genus  Salvia , is a natural source of herbal medicine . Chemical 

constituents of  S. miltiorrhiza  have been  identified, including more than 30 lipophilic 

compounds with diterpene quinone structures  such as tanshinone I (Tan I) and 

tanshinone IIA (Tan IIA),  as well as  more than 50 hydrophilic compounds with 

phenolic acid structures  such as salvianolic acid A ( SA A) and rosmarinic acid (RA) 

> 19

. Salvianolic acids are  among  the most important bioactive components of  S. 

miltiorrhiza , as they  display  antioxidant, anti -inflammatory, anti cancer  and other 

beneficial  activities  20 . Upon  a thorough  screening  of  a natural medicinal agent (NMA) 

library , we  identified a group of  S. miltiorrhiza -derived  compounds  specifically  SAA, 

salvianolic acid B (SAB) and salvianolic acid E (SAE) , as candidates with  the 

capacity  to selectively induce  programmed  death  of  senescent cell s. In animal 

models , these SA  agent s remarkably  improve d chemotherapeutic efficacy and 

prolong ed  post -treatment survival of tumor -bearing  mice . More importantly , SAs 

improved physical function of  animals  by depleting senescent cells  from  multiple 

solid organs . We propose  natural compounds SAA, SAB and SAE  as  an emerging 

sub group  of  senolytics, which are phenolic acids in nature  and induce a dual death 

modality of senescent cells, thus  hold ing  the potential to  intervene in  age -related 

diseases .

Results 

The SA family members  A, B and E display senolytic  activity  upon preliminary 

screening of a NMA library 

To  identify  small molecule  chemicals  with the  potential  to  modulate senescent cells, 

an unbiased  drug  screen was  performed  with a library  composed of 5 5 naturally -

derived medicinal agents ( NMA library)  (Supplementary Table 1) . We employ ed  a

primary normal human prostate stromal cell line, PSC27, as a cell -based model for 

in vitro  screening . Composed  predominantly  of fibroblasts but with a minor 

percentage of non -fibroblast cell lineages  such as  smooth muscle cells  and 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 5

endothelial cells , PSC27  cells  develop a SASP  pattern upon  exposure to  exogenous 

stimuli  including  genotoxic chemotherapy  and  ionizing radiation  21 -24 . To induce 

senescence, w e treated  PSC27  cells  with a pre -optimized sub -lethal dose of  the 

genotoxic  agent  bleomycin (BLEO)  and observed typical  cellular senescence , as 

evidenced by  increased  staining  positivity  of  senescence -as sociated  β-

galactosidase (SA -β-gal), decreased  5-bromo -2' -dexoyuridine ( BrdU ) incorporation 

and elevated DNA damage repair (DDR) foci several days afterwards 

(Supplementary Fig. 1a -c).  There was a significant  upregulation  of  the  SASP and 

senescence marker s after BLEO treatment  (Supplementary Fig. 1 d). We then 

developed  a technical  strategy to  streamline the screening procedure and  determin e

the effects individual  agent s generated  on the  survival  and/or expression status  of 

human  senescent cells (Fig. 1a). 

A major advantage of senolytic agents is the ir  prominent  capacity  for  selectively 

inducing programmed death of senescent cells, as exemplified by ABT -263 

(navitoclax ), ABT -737, combined use of dasatinib and quercetin (‘D + Q’) and the 

natural flavonoid procyanidin C1 (PCC1) , the latter  a senolytic flavonoid  we  alread y

reported  25 -28 . To establish the potential of PSC27 as a  valid  cell model for  senolytic 

screening, we first tested the efficacy of  these  geroprotective  agent s against 

senescent  cells . Preliminary data  indicated  that each of these  senolytic s was able 

to  effectively  deplete senescent  cells , but not  their  proliferating c ounterpart s, thus 

validating  the  technical  feasibility of using  PSC27  cells  for  subsequent  assays 

(Supplementary  Fig. 1e).  After  screening the NMA library by experimentally 

scrutinizing  individual  components , we  noticed  that  a subset of  compounds  was  able 

to  selectively kill senescent cells  in  culture  (Fig. 1 b; Supplementary Fig. 1 f). 

Notably , the  natura lly derived agents showing a capacity  as potential  senolytics 

all  belong ed  to the salvianolic acid (SA) family. Similar to PCC1, a  natural  senolytic 

agent  used  as  a positive control  in these assays , several  SA members  including  A, 

B, E and F (SAA, SAB, SAE and SAF, respectively , hereafter ) displayed  a strong 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 6

capacity for  reducing the number of  senescent cells  (Fig. 1c ,d).  Among them, 

however, SAF was excluded from further  studies , mainly due to its cytotoxicity 

against both proliferating and senescent cells,  impl ying  potential  adverse effects  in 

vivo  (Fig. 1b).  In this study, we chose to focus on  SAA, SAB and SAE,  a subset  of 

phytochemical agents that  had been  largely  underexplored  for  senotherapeutic 

potential , although  they had  previously  been  reported  to have  various 

pharmacological activities including anti -atherosclero tic , cardioprotecti ve ,

neuroprotecti ve  and anticancer effects  29, 30 .

Despite the  outstanding  potential  of a few agents in the NMA library to serve as 

effective  senomorphics, as evidenced by their capacity in downregulating the 

expression of CXCL8, a  key  SASP  factor  (Supplementary Fig. 1 g), we chose to 

focus on NMA components that exhibited senolytic activity, a  highly valuable 

property that hitherto has been found  only  for  a limited number of  compounds, 

among which  naturally -derived  agents are even rarer  in the current geroprotective 

arsenal .

SA  compounds  are  senolytic  against senescent cells  induced by  various 

stimuli and across multiple  cell lineages 

The polyphenolic  and  hydrophilic  compound s of SA family have  been reported with 

various bioactivities , whereas  their potential  for  targeting senescen t cells  appears 

to have remained unknown to date . We first  assessed the competency  and 

selectivity of  SAA, SAB and SAE  in eliminating senescent cells  in  culture  conditions .

Both SAA and SAB  exhibited  senolytic  activity  against  senescent stromal cells  once 

the  concentration  has reached  10 0 μM,  while SAE displayed senolytic capacity 

starting  even  at  the concentration of 50  μM. In contrast,  proliferating cells remain ed 

largely unaffected  under  these conditions  (Fig. 2a -c, Extended Data  Fig.  1a-c and 

Extended Data Fig.  2a-c).

Although higher concentrations  of these compounds  resulted in  a relatively 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 7

lower survival rate of  senescent cells, with a threshold at  approximately  300  μM, 

SAA and SAB  exhibited  cyto toxicity  against  prolife ra ting  cells  only  when used at 600 

μM or higher (Fig. 2 c and  Extended Data Fig.  1c). The  upper  threshold of SAE  for 

senolytic activity  againist  senescent cells  was 200  μM,  with  toxicity against control 

cell s starting from  300  μM ( Extended Data Fig.  2c).  Data from  time -course  assays 

of  caspase 3/7 activity  indicated  that  SAA , SAB  and SAE  caused  apoptotic 

responses  within 12 h,  with the effect  reaching a plateau  28 h after treatment  (Fig. 

2d, Extended Data Fig.  2d and  Extended Data Fig.  3d). Th ese results  are  generally 

consistent with  data  acquired  from  viability  measurements (Fig. 2 e, Extended Data 

Fig.  1e  and  Extended Data Fig.  2e ). The s enolytic nature of  these  SA compounds 

was  subsequently  con firmed  in  cells that  were induced  to become  senescen t by 

replicative exhaustion  (RS) or oncogen e HRAS G12V  overexpression (OIS), 

senescence induction modalities that are alternative to  TIS but share phenotypic 

similarities  (Fig. 2f,g,  Extended Data Fig.  1f,g , Extended Data Fig.  2f,g  and 

Supplementary Fig.  2a-l) (Supplementary Table 2) . Our  data  together  suggest  that 

SAA, SAB and SAE can selectively clear senescent human stromal cells induced 

by various stimuli in a dose -dependent manner, while non -senescent or proliferating 

cells  remain largely unaffected  when  treated  at  the same  concentrations  of SA 

agents  as  proved to be  effective against  their senescent counterparts .

Given the  preeminent  capacity of SA compounds in selectively targeting PSC27 

cells, which are of human prostate origin, we  also tested  human fetal lung fibroblasts 

(IMR90 ), primary human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and human 

adipose -derived  mesenchymal stem cells ( AT -MSC) with these phytochemicals.  The 

results showed that senescent cells of all of these lineages had similar susceptibility 

to  selective ablation by SA compounds, whereas non -senescent  controls  remained 

largely  unaffected  (Supplementary  Fig.  3a-i) (Supplementary Table  3). We further 

confirmed by flow cytometry induction of apoptosis in senescent cells in response 

to  SA  agent s, whereas proliferating cells remained  basically  viable  (Fig. 2 h,i, 

Extended Data  Fig.  1h, i and  Extended Data  Fig.  2h,i ). Taken together,  these  data 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 8

suggest  SA compounds h ave  potential  for  selectively  target ing  senescent cells 

across various cell types and  regardless of  senescence  inducers , by  causing 

programmed cell death  through  apoptosis .

Apoptosis, necroptosis,  ferroptosis  and pyroptosis  represent  distinct 

programmed cell death  mechanism s 31 . To  determine  whether senescent cell 

clearance  mediated by these SA compounds  is  exclusively  through induction of 

apoptosis,  or  collaterally  via  other forms of programmed cell death, we  chose to  first 

treat cells with the pan -caspa se apoptosis inhibitor  quinolyl -valyl -O-methylaspartyl -

[-2,6 -difluorophenoxy] -methylketone  (QVD -OPh ).  The  capacity of SAA  in  kill ing 

senescent cells was  markedly abrogated upon  QVD -OPh  treatment, suggesting  that 

SAA  execute s its  senolytic  activity  marked ly through activation of a n apoptotic 

response in senescent cells  (Fig. 2j) . To substantiate  this , we performed further 

experiments . D ata from  assays involving  relevant  chemical inhibitors  basically 

excluded  the possibility of SAA -induc ing  cell death  via  pyroptosis  or  necroptosis .

However,  senescent cells w ere partially rescued  when exposed to the  ferroptosis -

specific  inhibitor  Liproxstatin -1 (LIP) , suggesting the involvement of ferroptotic 

pathway  upon  senescent cell death induced by SAA  (Fig. 2j ). 

A similar pattern was observed in the case of  SAB - or  SAE -mediated cell death, 

which was mainly through apoptosis  and ferroptosis  of senescent cells ( Extended 

Data  Fig.  1j and Extended Data  Fig.  2j).  Thus,  SA compounds, specifically SAA, 

SAB  and SAE , a  subset of  phytochemical constituent s derived from  S. miltiorrhiza ,

hold the potential to  induce  senescent cell  death  via  engag ement of  both apoptosis 

and ferroptosis.  Although  some  natural agents such as ginsenoside RK1  can  cause 

ferroptosis in cancer cells  and  inhibit  tumor progression  32 , the potential of targeting 

senescent cells  with a natural compound  via  induc tion of  ferroptosis either along or 

together with other forms of  programm ed cell  death  has been  so far  underexplored. 

SAs  downregulate the SASP while  engaging pro -apoptotic and  pro -ferroptotic 

pathways in senescent cells 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 9

Given the  efficacy of SA compounds  for  selectively inducing senescent cell death, 

we next  queried  the functional mechanism(s) supporting these actions.  SAs and 

their precursors, including RA, caffeic acid ester derivatives, represent a group of 

water -soluble phenolic acids of  S. miltiorrhiza  bunge  29, 33 . As the major bioactive 

compounds of  S. miltiorrhiza , SAs  display  the capacity to inhibit cancer cell 

proliferation, metastasis and angiogenesis, while inducing their apoptosis and 

autophagy  34 . Of note,  SAs  possess  anti -inflammatory and antioxidant stress 

properties, and are effective in preventing lipid accumulation, mitochondrial 

dysfunction and ferroptosis  35 . For example, SAA can inhibit lipid accumulation ,

reduce oxidative stress,  and attenuate  chronic inflammation and  hepatic steatosis, 

thereby  alleviating  non -alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)  in diabetic apoE −/− mice 

fed a  Western diet,  mainly  through activation of  the  AMPK and IGFBP -1 pathways 

> 35

. However, the molecular targets of SAs in senescent cells remain  largely  unclear .

As a  plant -derived secondary metabolite , SA A represents an important component 

of the hydrophilic constituents isolated from roots of  S. miltiorrhiza , and  displays 

structur al  features di stinct  from other SA compounds  such as  SAB and SAE  (Fig. 

3a , Extended Data  Fig.  3a and  Extended Data  Fig.  4a). 

We first  determined  the impact of  SAA on the transcriptomic profile  of senescent 

cells. Bioinformatics showed that  2089  genes were significantly  downregulated ,

accompanied by  upregulat ion of 1270 genes  in  senescent  stromal cells upon  SAA 

treatment (Supplementary Fig.  4a).  Among the se  genes, w e noticed  a large array of 

SASP factors , which  were  upregulat ed  upon cellular senescence , a tendency  large ly 

reversed  by  SAA  (Fig. 3b).  Network analysis indicated  intricate  mutual interactions 

or functional  links  between these ‘senescen ce -up and  SAA -down’  molecules, which 

showed up  on the top list of differentially expressed genes,  many  of which  were 

secreted factors  (Fig. 3 c).  Genome -wide GS EA mapping suggest ed  downregulation 

of intracellular activities  such as  TNF α signaling, hypoxia, inflammatory response 

and DNA repair  (Fig. 3 d). Geneset -specific  GSEA profiling indicated pronounced 

inhibition of both the SASP and NF -κB signatures by SAA  treatment  (Fig. 3 e,f). 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 10

After mapping significantly changed transcripts to a gene ontology (GO) 

database comprising HPRD, Entrez Gene and UniProt accession identifiers  36 -38 , we 

found that the most prevalent biological processes of upregulated genes (top 200 

selected as representatives)  include  cell communication, signal transduction, 

immune response, cell growth and/or maintenance ( Supplementary Fig.  4b). The 

most  evident  cellular components of bioactive proteins encoded by these genes 

were those associated with plasma membrane, integral to plasma or organelle 

membrane,  nucleus and  endoplasmic reticulum (Supplementary Fig.  4c). 

Additionally, major molecular functions correlated with  the most  altered genes 

involve  activities of G-protein coupled receptor s, regular receptors,  structural 

molecule s and cell adhesion molecules ( Supplementary Fig.  4d).  Together,  our  data 

imply  that  SAA  limits  the expression of genes  inherently  associated  with pro -

inflammatory response s and secret ory activity of senescent cells . The gene 

expression modulation pattern, SASP and NF -κB signature change, intermolecular 

function network and GO database profiling we observed in SAA -treated senescent 

cells were largely reproduced by datasets  derived from bioinformatics analyses of 

SAB - and SAE -exposed senescent cells ( Extended Data  Fig.  3b-h and  Extended 

Data  Fig.  4b-h), suggesting  a range of  overlapping functions between these SA 

compounds, although they do not seem to share  a pronounced  similarit y in  chemical 

structure .

We then employed  GSVA , a strategy  provid ing  increased power to detect subtle 

pathway activity changes over sample population s. There was a significant 

inactivation of pathway activities including antigen processing and presentation, 

cytokine -cytokine receptor interaction and inflammatory response (Fig. 3g), largely 

consistent with GSEA outputs.  We also noticed increased activities of apoptosis and 

ferroptosis in SAA -treated senescent cells, suggesting a distinct cell death fate (Fig. 

3g).  To  further dissect  mechanisms underlying senescent cell death , we  performed 

immunoblot assays and  found that  the  DDR signaling appeared  suppressed  in 

senescent  cells, as indicated by reduced levels of p -ATM and  γH2AX (Fig. 3h  and 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 11

Supplementary Fig.  5a,b ). Activation of  the cellular  stress sensor, p38 mitogen -

activated protein kinase (MAPK), was observed in senescent cells,  a pattern  subject 

to reversal by SA A or reduction by SAB and SAE. The  signaling pathway mediated 

by phosphorylation of Akt and mTOR  was downregulated, implying SASP inhibition 

in these cells. We noticed increased expression of NOXA and/or PUMA,  which are 

BCL -2 homology domain 3 (BH3) -only  pro -apoptotic family members  that 

functionally mediate programmed cell death (Fig. 3f -h).  Although expression of BCL -

2 remained u nchanged in all cases, e xpression of BAX was elevated upon exposure 

of senescent cells to SAE, BCL -xL was decreased in cells treated by SAA or SAB, 

changes that potentially impair  survival of senescent cells.  We observed increased 

self -cleavage of caspase 3 in all groups, suggesting the engagement  of 

mitochondria -mediated apoptosis, which usually involves cascade  signaling  by 

caspase s. Of note, expression of  glutathione  peroxidase  4 ( GPX4 ) and  GTP 

cyclohydrolase 1 ( GCH1 ) was markedly upregulated upon cellular senescence, but 

subject to reversal when cells were treated  with  SA s (Fig. 3g) . This finding is 

consistent with data derived from our cell survival assays ( Fig. 2j, Extended Data 

Fig. 1j and Extended Data  Fig. 2 j).  As both GPX4 and GCH1  functionally antagonize 

ferroptosis, a non -apoptotic form of cell death  typically  characterized by ferrous ion 

(Fe 2+ )-dependent accumulation of lipid peroxides, our data suggest a distinct 

mechanism  involving both apoptosis and ferroptosis  correlated with reduced  viability 

of senescent cells when treated by SA s, a subset of  polyphenolic  compound s

isolated  from  S. miltiorrhiza .

GSVA -based proteomic data profiling further supported the induction of both 

apoptosis and ferroptosis of senescent cells after exposure to SA compounds 

(Extended Data  Fig.  5b -d). This is consistent with the datasets of transcript -

associated RNA -seq profiling and protein level analysis with immunoblot assays. 

Proteomics reveal  GSTP1 as a  major molecular  target  of  SAs  to mediate 

downstream cellular responses 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 12

Disruption of cellular homeostatic mechanisms essential for senescent cell survival 

seems to be a  function  shared by  all  three  SA compounds.  To establish how SA s

induce  programmed death  of senescent cells, we chose to first screen for potential 

molecules  that SAA, SAB and SAE commonly  target . To this end, we generated  a

set of  biotin -labeled compounds (SAA -bio, SAB -bio and SAE -bio)  (Supplementary 

Fig.  6a-c)  and  measured  the binding capacity of these complexes to recombinant 

proteins coated on  20K  HuProt TM  human protein microarray s. We reasoned that 

proteins binding to these  bio -compounds may represent direct targets of SA 

molecules and  functionally mediate their  biological activit ies . We  applied  bio -

compounds  to  20 K HuProt TM  human  protein  micro array s (Supplementary Fig.  6a),

and  found the presence of  154 co -identified  target s between the outputs of these 

bio -compounds  (Supplementary Fig.  6b)  (Supplementary Table 4) . Pathway and 

process enrichment analysis  indicated that  the most outstanding GO items of these 

co -identified targets  are  cellular oxidant detoxification, cellular catabolic and 

carboxylic acid metabolic processes, activities inherently correlated with anti -

oxidative and metabolic regulation  (Supplementary Fig.  6c). It is noteworthy that 

among these pro teins,  46 were top -ranked  by statistical significance  and  linked  to 

cellular catabolic process and cellular oxidant detoxification, activities that are 

hierarchically clustered on the enriched terms  (Fig. 4 a,b ) (Supplementary Table 5) .

Further  assessment  performed with biotin -based pulldown assays  involving 

streptavidin -agarose beads  followed by MS profiling showed that there are 436 

proteins physically bound by all the 3 biotin -labeled compounds (Fig. 4c, d)

(Supplementary Table 6) . Upon performance of an overall  screening  of the targets 

identified by both human protein microarrays and pulldown/MS analysis, we noticed 

there were  7 targets shared by outputs of these strategies (Fig. 4e and 

Supplementary Fig.  6d-f). Among them  was  glutathione S -tr ansferase  Pi1 ( GSTP1 ), 

an isozyme  responsible for  redox homeostasis  maintenance  via  detoxification and 

anti -oxidation  in cellular  oxidative  stress responses including senescence  per se  39,  

> 40

(Fig. 4 f,g ). Being  a homodimeric protein of  ∼46 kDa  (Supplementar y Fig.  6g),

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 13

GSTP1 acts as a key regulator of redox homeostasis, while a potent inducer of 

cellular senescence, tryptanthrin, can directly bind GSTP1 and inhibit its enzymatic 

activity , causing  ROS accumulation and DDR  exacerbation,  events  that sensitize 

senescent cells to apoptosis induced by ABT -263  39 . However, whether GSTP1 is a 

co -target of SA  compound s and  mediate s senolysis remains  basically  unknown. 

We then queried the biophysical properties associated with interactions of SA 

compounds with GSTP1. Cellular thermal shift assay (CETSA),  which assesses 

protein thermal stabilization after ligand binding  at the molecular level , was 

performed  over  a temperature range from 25 -50  °C . Interestingly, a substantial 

decrease  of the stability of  recombinant human  GSTP1  (rh GSTP1)  upon incubation 

with each SA compound was observed, in sharp contrast to the vehicle -treated (Fig. 

4h).  Although  GSTP1  expression  remained largely unchanged  at  transcription  level, 

the overall activity significantly reduced upon senescence, and further declined upon 

treatment by SAs  (Fig. 4h ,i ). The decline of GSTP1  protein signal  in the presence of 

SA compounds  is consistent with its activity loss,  suggest ing  that physical interaction 

with these agents may lead to reduced stability,  potentiated  by degradation of 

GSTP1  during  in vitro  incubation.  Alternatively, results from surface plasmon 

resonance (SPR) assay, a label -free direct optical biosensor strategy, indicated a 

potent  binding of  GSTP1  in the presence of  SA compounds,  yielding a p redicted 

dissociation constant  (KD) for each agent (1. 88  μM , 1. 15 μM and 1. 32  μM for SAA, 

SAB and SAE, respectively)  (Fig. 4 k-m). 

To identify the residue(s) of  GSTP1  responsible for  its  physical interaction with 

SA compounds , we performed  in silico  simulation  modelling  by molecular docking. 

The results suggest  that  both SAA and SAB  have  direct hydrogen bond connections 

with  GSTP1  via  certain  residues , specifically Cys10 1 (Fig. 4 n, upper and middle 

illustrations).  Alternatively, we noticed that SAE ha s direct hydrogen bond 

connections with GSTP1  via  its residue  Cys47 , which we speculate serves as a 

major site  (Fig. 4 n, lower illustration).  Previous  studies  indicate  that  GSTP1 has  two 

solvent accessible cysteine residues, which can affect its catalytic activity  once 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 14

genetically modified.  Among them , Cys47 is located near the  binding site for 

reduced glutathione ( G-site ) and is critical for maintaining conformation and stability 

of the G -site,  while  Cys10 1 is located at the dimer interface and form s a disulfide 

bridge with Cys47,  necessitating  a conformational change of the active site  to 

inactivat e the enzyme  41 .

As molecular docking simulation  indicated  proximity of  Cys10 1 to  SAA and SAB ,

which bind within the enzymatic pocket of GSTP1,  we  queried  whether th is  residue 

participate s in  SAA or SAB  binding.  We  further  hypothesized that  SAA and SAB 

might competitively inhibit  glutathione (GSH ) binding to GSTP1, potentially 

suppressing its enzymatic activity , or  alternatively,  cause GSTP1 degradation . We 

performed site -directed mutagenesis to generate  a Cys10 1Ser (C101S)  variant , with 

the recombinant GSTP1 protein linked  to  a GFP tag . Our study indicated  that 

mutation of  C101S  compromise d binding of  GSTP1  with  SAA  (Supplementary  Fig. 

8a),  suggesting  that  Cys10 1 mediat es  the interaction  between  GSTP1  and  SAA .

Notably, a  similar pattern was observed in the case of GS TP1 binding by SAB 

(Supplementary Fig.  8b).  To probe  the  GSTP1 -SAE  interaction, we  examined 

whether  the  Cys 47 Ser  (C47S)  mutation  significantly  alters the binding capacity  of 

the enzyme with SAE . Our  data  suggest that  Cys47  is essential for SAE to bind 

GSTP1 , as evidenced by  elevated  KD or reduced binding affinity between these 

molecules  (Supplementary Fig.  8c) .

Recent studies reported a GPX4/FSP1 -independent cellular defense 

mechanism against ferroptosis , while  SMURF2 -mediated GSTP1 ubiquitination and 

degradation , or  chemical  inhibition of GSTP1's catalytic activity can sensitize cancer 

cells to ferroptosis  42 . However, whether directly targeting GSTP1  can induce 

programmed death  of senescent cells  remains un clear . To address this, we used 

LAS17, a  potent and selective tyrosine -directed irreversible inhibitor of  GSTP1 

activity  43 , to treat senescent cells.  Upon  exposure to  LAS17  in culture, senescent 

cells displayed significantly reduced survival  rate , in contrast to parallel control s

(Extended Data  Fig.  5a ). Of note, this tendency  was significantly , albeit incompletely 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 15

reversed in the presence of  QVD  or LIP , suggesting  the involvement of  both 

apoptosis and ferroptosis  during  senescent cell  death induced by  GSTP1 -specific 

targeting . The se  results were  essentially  reproduced by data from treatment with 

Ezatiostat,  a tripeptide analog of glutathione to act as  prodrug inhibitor for GSTP1 

> 44

. Collectively,  the  data  are  basical ly  consistent with our finding that  SA compounds 

directly bind to the antioxidant enzyme GSTP1 and  affect  its  stability and/or  function 

in senescent  cells , eventually caus ing  their  increased  death  rate . Therefore, GTSP1 

is a n antioxidant enzyme in senescent cells  and has  an essential  role  in  maintain ing 

their survival,  although  its relationship to  other molecules in  the SCAP network of 

senescent cells merit s further  investigation .

SAs  cause  mitochondrial dysfunction  and  induce  apoptosis and ferroptosis 

in senescent cells 

Since  SA family members  generally  enhance  cell viability, restrain ROS production 

and reduce oxidative stress in mammalian cells  29, 45 , we next asked whether similar 

or antioxidant effects c an  be observed in senescent cells exposed to SAs.  We  first 

examined the influence of SA  compounds  on  intracellular  ROS level s or ROS 

production capacity  of  PSC27 sublines . Upon senescence induc tion  by BLEO, we 

observed elevated ROS biosynthesis, as evidenced by increased signals of 2',7' -

dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate (DCFH -DA), a fluorescent probe used to 

monitor free radical reactions  (Fig. 5a,b) . Of note, treatment by  each of  SA A, SAB 

and SAE  further augmented DCFH -DA signal intensity, rather than decreasing it. 

This is  in  contrast to previously reported effects of SA molecules , which  can  dampen 

intracellular oxidation, counteract oxidative stress and alleviate apoptosis  46, 47 . More 

importantly,  we noticed increased activity  of caspase 3 cleavage in senescent cells 

upon  expos ure  to SAs, as exemplified by  the case of  SA A treatment  (Fig. 5c). 

Elevated nuclear translocation of  p53  was observed in senescent cells,  a tendency 

that  was reversed upon exposure to SAA,  consistent with  previous  studies 

demonstrating nuclear exclusion of p53 as a key step in senescent cell apoptosis  48 .

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 16

Senescent cells  have  mitochondrial dysfunction and metabolic  reprogramming ,

events  responsible for  oxidative stress and production of reactive oxygen species 

(ROS) including superoxide  49 . We employed MitoSOX Red,  a cell permeable probe 

to measure  the production capacity of  mitochondrial ROS  especially superoxide, 

and observed  a significantly increased  level  of mitochondrial ROS in senescent cells ,

but not  their p roliferating c ounterparts , upon treatment by SA compounds  (Fig. 5d) .

The se  data suggest compromised ability to maintain homeostasis  in  senescent cells 

treat ed  with  SAs, a  case  distinct from  that of  non -senescent cells  and reminiscent 

of the effect of other senolytic agents , such as the natural flavonoid PCC1  28 .

Mitochondrial dysfunction is inherently linked with cellular senescence and 

aging phenotypes,  as  evidenced by compromised mitochondrial membrane 

potential ( Δψ m) and elevated mitochondrial ROS levels  50 . Specifically, reduction of 

Δψ m represent s an intracellular  physiological  dysfunction  that  can  trigger apoptosis 

via  the mitochondrial -mediated intrinsic pathway  51 . A significant  decrease  of  Δψ m

was  observed  in senescent cells,  although control cells remained largely unaf fected 

upon exposure to SAs , as  evidenced  by  data  from  JC -1 assays  (Fig.  5e, f).  However, 

the  pattern  of  Δψ m decline in senescent cells appeared further exacerbated when 

cells were  exposed to  SAs, as suggested by an increased number of monomers  but 

fewer  aggregates (Fig. 5 e,f). 

To validate these apoptosis -related changes, we examined extent of 

cytochrome c release, an event associated with apoptosis and that can act as a 

direct apoptotic driver  51 . Immunoblots with lysates SA -treated cells indicated that 

exposure of senescent cells to S As such as SAA  enhanced cytochrome c release 

from mitochondria to their surrounding cytoplasmic space (Fig. 5g). Indeed, the 

release of cytochrome c from mitochondria is basically in line with caspase 

activation in SAA -treated senescent cells (Fig. 2h -j). Therefore, SA  compounds 

augment ROS production, cause  Δψ m loss and promote cytochrome c release from 

mitochondria in senescent cells, events linked with mitochondria l disability and 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 17

programmed cell death  at least  via  apoptosis. 

As our earlier data suggest that SAs may induce both apoptosis and ferroptosis 

in senescent cells, we next examined the underlying mechanisms. Induction of 

senescence or treatment by SAs did not alter the protein level of GSTP1, as 

evidenced by immunoblot  (Extended Data  Fig.  5e ). However, the p -JNK/p -c-Jun 

pathway, which can functionally mediate ferroptosis  52, 53 , was activated upon 

senescence induction, with the activation further enhanced after SA treatment. In 

contrast, GPX4 expression showed a different alteration pattern, with the signal 

remarkably elevated in  senescent  cells but reduced upon SA treatment. Further data 

suggest that GPX4 is subject to normal intracellular turnover and  excluded the 

ubiquitin /p roteasome - or ribosome/ autophagy -dependent degradatio n of GPX4, 

suggesting that the  transcription -based regulation plays a major role in GPX4 

expression in senescent cells  (Extended Data  Fig.  5f-h). Senescent cells exhibited 

a marked  declin e of  reduced glutathione/oxidized glutathione (GSH/GSSG) ratio ,

which further decreased upon SA treatment (Extended Data  Fig.  5i). 

Immunoprecipitation assay indicated a direct physical interaction of GSTP1 with 

JNK in senescent cells,  which was  weakened upon SA treatment (Extended Data 

Fig.  5j).  This is consistent with activation of p-c-Jun signaling in SA -treated 

senescent cells (Extended Data  Fig.  5e)  and effect of  ferroptosis -inducing 

compounds  on  phosphorylation  of  c-Jun, a core component of the activating protein -

1 (AP -1) transcription factor complex,  which  regulates cellular processes including 

proliferation , survival  and death  54, 55 . As  AP -1 can compete with certain transcription 

factors at the enhancer/promoter region  of genes , we observed  downregulat ed 

GPX4  expression  in senescent cells  treated by  SA compounds . Data from c loning 

of GPX4 enhancer/promoter into a luciferase reporter vector supported that  GPX4 

is negatively regulated at transcriptional level by  JNK/ c-Jun  pathway  (Extended 

Data  Fig.  5k). 

We noticed that sene scen t cells displayed  higher levels of  intracellular Fe 2+ 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 18

(Supplementary Fig.  9a), which  contribute s to  lipid oxidation . The  signal  intensity  of 

intracellular Fe 2+  was not change d upon t reatment with  SA  comp ounds such as SAA, 

erastin or  Lip1  (activator and inhibitor of ferroptosis,  resp ectively) , but  wa s reduced 

by  an iron chelator  deferoxamine mesylate ( DFO ), suggesting  the  senescent cell -

related vulnerability to  ferroptosis was  ferrous ion -dependent.  We next used  4,4 -

difluoro -4-bora -3a,4a -diaza -s-indacene  (BODIPY -C11 ), a  sensor  dye that  monitor s

lipid peroxidation  in  ferroptotic cells  56 , and found increased  BODIPY 

oxidation /reduction  ratio  in senescent cells upon SA treatment ( Supplementary Fig. 

9b). However, this tendency was largely reversed by GSTP1, JNK or ferroptosis 

inhibitors, further substantiating the pivotal role of GSTP1/JNK/c -Jun  axis  in 

mediating ferroptosis of senescent cells. 

It is reported that  both  apoptosis and ferroptosis  are  closely related to 

mitochondrial  dys function , a  subcellular  change that can induce  oxidative stress 

damage  and  in turn  further  promote s programmed cell  death activities  57, 58 . To 

profile  mitochondrial  dynamics,  we  employed  transmission electron microscopy 

(TEM) for morphological characterization. Senescent cells treated by SA 

compounds  showed ruptured mitochondria , abnormally shaped  cristae , which are 

surrounded by an increased number of  dark -stained  fragment s as  compared  with 

control cells,  the latter  generally  exhibit ing  round -shaped mitochondria with well -

developed cristae  (Fig . 5h ). Thus, TEM  imaging  provide s ultramicro  evidence  for the 

subcellular structure -damaging  effect of S As in senescent cells , which were induced 

to  undergo  a dual death modality  characterized by  both  apoptosis and  ferroptosis. 

SAs promote tumor regression and  restrain  chemo resistance  conferred by 

treatment -damaged  TME 

Since SAs  have  capacity and selectivity  for  eliminat ing  senescent cells  in vitro ,

we next  queried  whether th ese  agent s could be exploited to intervene  in  age -related 

pathologies  in vivo . Drug resistance  can  affect  the efficacy of  anticancer treatments 

and  senescent cells  can  con tribute to therapeutic resistance through an  in vivo 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 19

SASP in  the  treatment -damaged tumor microenvironment (TME)  21, 22, 59 . Targeted 

elimination of therapy -induced senescent cells  re duce s side -effects of 

chemoth erapy and prevents cancer relapse  in animals  28, 60 . Despite these 

advances , the  feasib ility  of  SA -mediated  clearance  of senescent cells from primary 

tum ors to  increase  efficacy of anticancer treatments  needs further study .

To this end, we chose to generate tissue recombinants by  combining  PSC27 

cells with PC3 cells, the latter a malignant  prostate cancer ( PCa ) cell line, at a pre -

optimized ratio  under  in vitro  condition  (1:4)  22 . Admixed cells were subcutaneously 

implanted to the hind flank of mice with non -obese diabetes and severe combined 

immunodeficiency ( M-NSG ). The resulting tumors were measured at the end of an 

8-week period, with  xenograft  tissues  gathered  for pathological assessment. 

Compared with tumors comprising naive PSC27 stromal cells and PC3 cancer cells, 

xenografts composed of senescent PSC27 cells and PC3 cells  had  increased 

volume s, confirming  the tumor -promoting effects of senescent cells  in vivo 

(Extended Data  Fig.  6a). 

We designed a preclinical protocol to incorporate genotoxic therapeutics and/or 

senolytics  to imitate clinical  scenarios  (Fig. 6a).  Upon  stable  establishment  of  cancer 

grafts in the transplanted animals , which usually takes 2 weeks after subcutaneous 

implantation, a single dose of placebo or mitoxantrone (MIT, a chemotherapeutic 

agent used in clinical oncology) was delivered to mice on the 1st day of the 3rd, 5th 

and 7th weeks until the end of the 8 -week  regimen ( Extended Data  Fig.  6b). In 

contrast to placebo group, administration  of MIT  delayed  tumor growth,  thus 

validating the efficacy of MIT as a  chemotherapeutic drug  (4 6.1% reduction in tumo r

size) (Fig. 6 b).  Although administration of  SA compounds, as exemplified by  the 

case of  SAA  intervention , did not cause  tumor shrinkage,  MIT  treatment followed by 

SAA  delivery  (2 0 mg /kg  via  intraperitoneal ( i.p. ) injection 2 weeks  post  the  1st  MIT 

dose and then delivered biweekly)  promoted  tumor regression ( 49 .5% reduction  of 

tumor  volume  compared  with MIT treatment alone ; 72.8% reduction compared with 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 20

the placebo treatment) (Fig. 6b). 

We next  tested if  cellular senescence occurred in tumor foci. Unsurprisingly, MIT 

administration caused appearance of  many  senescent cells in tumor  foci . Of note ,

SAA  delivery to chemotherapy -treated animals  eliminated  the majority of senescent 

cells (Fig.  6c,d).  We performed l aser capture microdissection  (LCM), a technique 

that allows selective acquirement of targeted cell lineages from tissues,  which was 

then coupled to transcriptomics -based  assays . The data  indicated  significantly 

enhanced expression of  SASP factors  such as  IL6,  CXCL8,  GM -CSF, MMP3,  IL1 α

and  SPINK1 , a change  accompanied by  upregulation of gene s encoding  the 

senescence marker s p16 INK4a  and p21 CIP1  in  chem otherapy -challenged animals (Fig. 

6e and  Extended Data  Fig.  6c).  Interestingly,  this  tendency  was  predominantly 

observed in stromal cells rather than  their neighboring cancer cell counterparts ,

imply ing  the  possible  repopulation  of residual cancer cells, which  can  develop  gain -

of -functions , particularly drug  resistance  acquired  from  the treatment -damaged TME. 

Nevertheless , upon  SAA  administration  to animals , the  SASP -intensive expression 

pattern  was  attenuated , as  evidenced  by transcript assays and RNA -seq  data  (F ig. 

6f and  Extended Data  Fig.  6d). 

To  delineate  the mechanism s support ing  SASP  upregulation  in  MIT -treated mice, 

we dissected tumo rs from animals  challenged  with  these two agents 7 d after the 

1st  dose of  SAA  delivery,  a time point  prior to  the development of resista nt colonies 

in tumor foci . Compared with  pla cebo treatment, MIT administration  caused  DNA 

damage and  apoptosis, whereas  SAA  treatment  alone did not (Fig. 6 g).  However, 

when MIT -treated  mice  were co -administered  SAA , the  extent of  DNA damage and 

apoptosis  appeared  to be  increased , implying  enhanced cytotoxicity in animals  that 

receiv ed  treatment by  both chemotherapy and  the  senolytic  agent . Of note, w e

observed  increased  caspase 3  cleavage, a hallmark of cellular apoptosis, when  SAA 

was  administered  together with  MIT (Fig. 6 h) . The se  data  suggest  there is  an

enhanced  apoptotic  effect  by combining  of SAA with a chemotherapeutic agent. 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 21

Since SAA appears to improve short term anticancer therapeutic outcomes ,

posttreatment survival of the different animal groups was investigated . Tumor 

growth was monitored  in the preclinical cohort,  by assessing if tumor burden 

exceeded a threshold (a size of 2,000 mm 3), a criterion used by others  21, 61 . Animals 

receiving the  combined  MIT /SAA  treatment  exhibited  the most prolonged median 

survival,  which was  at least  38 .9% longer than the grou p treated with MIT alone (Fig. 

6i,  green  vs pink ). However,  SAA alone only margin ally  increased posttreatment 

survival.  Thus, administration of SAA  per se  neither alters tumo r growth nor 

promotes animal sur vival, whereas co -administration of  SAA  with MIT  has  a

synergistic effect. 

The  therapies  performed in these studies appeared to be  well tolerated by  mice ,

as no significant perturbations in creatinine , urea , liver  and kidney  enzyme levels or 

body weight were observed  (Extended Data  Fig.  6e,f).  Furthermore ,

chemotherapeutic and  geroprotective  agent s delivered  at doses  used  in  preclinical 

trials  did not interfere  significantly  with immune  system  integrity  or homoeostasis  in 

critical organs, even in immuno competent mice (Supplementary Fig.  10a-c). 

We then  tested  if effect s of SAA  observed in  these  preclinical  studies are 

reproduced  by other SA compounds with  senolytic  activity . Results from  in vivo 

treatments with SAB or SAE largely resembled those from SAA treatment 

(Supplementary Fig.  11a-h and Supplementary Fig.  12a-f). Together,  these  data 

support  the  possibility  that  the SA family  members  extracted from  S. miltiorrhiza ,

particularly SAA, SAB and SAE, phytochemical molecules of geroprotective 

potential,  once  combined with  classical  chemotherapy , can  enhance tumor 

response with out causing severe toxicity  in vivo .

Preclinical intervention with SAs improves physical function and  ex tends 

survival of  prematurely aged mice 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 22

Senolysis  represents an emerging strategy for treatment of various age -related 

disorders, while selective elimination of senescent cells alleviates pathological 

symptoms and improves organ function, as evidenced by preclinical studies and 

early clinical trials  62 . To further  test  est ablish  the effect of  SA compounds  on 

organismal aging, we  first use d model  animal s with accelerated development of 

senescence in tissues. W e treated WT mice with  whole body irradiation (WBI) at a 

sub -lethal dose (5 Gy),  an approach that induce s systemic cellular senescence  28 .

These therapy -challenged mice w ere  subsequently subject ed  to  geroprotective 

intervention  with  SA compounds  (20 mg/kg  via  i.p.) or vehicle  (twice  per  week) (Fig. 

7a).  Mice  that  had undergone  WBI  treatment  manifested abnormal body 

appearance,  including  grey ing  hair . However , this was alleviated by SAs  (Fig. 7b 

and Supplementary Fig.  13a,b ).  SA -β-gal -positive  cells were  detected  in vivo  in 

these animals,  with staining in  cardiac, pulmonary, and  prefrontal cortex  tissues  (Fig. 

7c-f).  Intermittent administration  of  SA A, SAB or SAE , decreased  the percent of SA -

β-gal -positive cells in  these  tissues significantly  de creased , in contrast to control 

samples from  vehicle -treated  post -WBI  mice  (Fig. 7 c-f and Supplementary Fig.  13c). 

We assessed  the impact of  SA  treatment  on  mouse  physical  function . Our data 

suggest that  WBI  per se  compromised exercise capacity a s well as  muscle strength 

as  determined  by treadmill  walking  and grip strength assays in the vehicle group 

compared  to  naï ve  counterpart animal s (Fig. 7 g and Supplementary Fig.  13d).  Of 

note, administering SAA, SAB, or SAE alleviated physical dysfunction. 

In mammal s, cognitive plasticity and short -term memory  are  executive functions 

mediated by the prefrontal cortex,  which  can be come  progressively impaired  with 

aging  63 . Although WBI caused a severe decline in cognitive function and memory, 

there was alleviation of short -term spatial working memory in the prematurely aged 

mice that had received SA based on Y -maze tests  (Fig. 7h and Supplementary Fig. 

13e).  SA compounds, albeit administered in an intermittent schedule, prolonged 

posttreatment survival relative to the vehicle group , with  animal  body weight 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 23

remaining largely  unchanged  (Fig. 7i and Supplementary Fig. 1 3f-h).  These data 

suggest administering SA compounds can alleviate physical dysfunction and reduce 

cognitive impairment in the case of premature aging , without overtly affecting 

physiology .

Senescent cell clearance by SA compounds alleviates physical dysfunction 

associated with  natural aging 

Recent studies demonstrated that even a small number of senescent cells can have 

effects on distant organs and transplanting senescent cells into young animals can 

induce physical dysfunction  64, 65  . We queried whether SAs that selectively eliminate 

senescent cells  in vivo  can decrease physical dysfunction in chronologically aged 

animals. We treated 20 -month -old WT animals with vehicle or SAA (20 mg/kg  i.p. )

once every 2 weeks for 4 months  (Fig. 8 a).  There was a higher percent of SA -β-gal -

positivity in lung, liver, kidney, prostate, heart, spleen, cortex, and pancreas of aged 

animals and this was decreased by SAA treatment  (Fig.  8b,c , Supplementary Fig. 

14a, Extended Data  Fig.  7a-h and Extended Data  Fig.  8a-f).  Extent of senescent 

cell clearance by SAA approached that of PCC1, a flavonoid senolytic  agent. SAA 

enhanced maximal walking speed, hanging endurance, treadmill endurance, grip 

strength, daily activity, and beam balance performance compared to animals treated 

with vehicle  (Fig. 8d-i),  although body weight and food intake  changed little 

(Extended Data  Fig.  8g,h).  Effects observed with SAA were similar to SAB or SAE 

(Supplementary Fig.  14b -e). 

The SASP was attenuated in lungs of aged mice treated with SAA compared to 

vehicle -treated animals  (Fig. 8j  and Supplementary Fig.  14f).  In lung transcriptome -

wide expression profiles of animals treated with SAA, a number of intracellular 

factors were affected, many of which were SASP components  (Supplementary Fig. 

15 a),  generally in line  with  downregulat ed  SASP  factors  in  human stromal tissues 

after  SAA intervention  (Fig.  6f).  In most of these studies,  in vivo  effects of SAA were 

comparable to those generated by PCC1, although effects of PCC1 were more 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 24

pronounced. Effects of SAB or SAE  were similar to those of SAA  (Supplementary 

Fig.  14f).  These results suggest that these small molecule compounds share 

geroprotective effects. 

To further test the potential of senescent cell clearance to extend remaining 

lifespan, we treated with SAA from older ages  (Fig.  8k).  WT mice receiving SAA 

intervention  (once  per  2 weeks or biweekly)  beginning at  24 -27 months  of age 

(approximatel y equivalent to an age of 75 -90 years in humans)  had  a 51 .4% longer 

median post -treatmen t lifespan (or  10 .9% longer over all lifespan) and lower 

mortality hazard (6 8.4%,  P < 0.0001) than  the vehicle -treated group (Fig.  8l,  m). 

The se  data  suggest  that  SAA  can  reduce  risk of age -associated mortality in  old 

animals . We also treated aged animals with SAB or SAE. SAB did not fully 

recapitulate effects of SAA, but SAE approached the efficacy of SAA 

(Supplementary Fig.  15 b-e). Hence, therapeutic potential differs among SA 

compounds administered  in vivo .

We tested if reduced  mortality  in aged animals came at a cost of increased late -

life morbidity. Physical function in mice treated with SAA or vehicle was tested 

monthly until death. Despite the longer remaining lifespan in SAA -treated mice, 

physical function during the last 2 months of  life did not appear substantially lower 

than that in vehicle -treated mice  (Fig.  8n and Extended Data  Fig.  9 a,b ).  At autopsy, 

incidence of some age -related disorders, tumor burdens and cause of death differed 

little between SAA -treated and vehicle -treated animals  (Fig.  8o).  Similar findings 

were made in mice treated with SAB or SAE  (Supplementary Fig.  15 f,g).  The SASP 

was attenuated in liver and lung, together with declines in peripheral blood protein 

levels of IL6, CXCL1 and CCL2  (Extended Data  Fig.  9c -e).  Oxidative stress 

appeared to be lower in liver of SAA -treated mice, with decreases in adducts of the 

lipid peroxidation product, 4 -hydroxynonenal (HNE), and an increases in the ratio of 

reduced to oxidized glutathione  (Extended Data  Fig.  9f,g),  consistent with the 

antioxidant properties of SA molecules, which scavenge free radicals and activate 

the antioxidant defense system  66, 67  .

Altogether,  we identified  several  senolytic  members  of the SA family, specifically 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 25

SAA, SAB and SAE, a subset of hydrophilic phytochemicals  mainly  derived from  S.

miltiorrhiza  Bunge. These compounds  can  reduce  the burden of senescent  cells  and 

possibly other  cells develop ing  a pro -inflammatory phenotype and  largely 

dependent on pro -survival senescence -associated anti -apoptotic  pathways, with  a

notable  advantage of  extending  lifespan  but  without causing  increased  morbidity in 

experimental mice . Through a series of preclinical trials, we demonstrated that  even 

when administered in  advanced  life, therapeutic  regimens  involving SA compounds 

ha ve  the  potential to significantly postpone age -related physical dysfunction, 

restrain age -related pathologies and improve health conditions. Therefore, our study 

provides a feasible and effective  therapeutic  paradigm to  both improve  health and 

increase  lifespan  by taking advantage of the senolytic  potential of phenolic acids, 

an emerging subset of naturally derived senolytics .

Discussion 

Exploiting bioactive agents to target senescent cells  with  senotherapeutics, 

holds the potential to prolong healthspan and reduce the incidence and severity of 

chronic pathologies  2. Beneficial effects of dietary phytochemicals, agents mainly 

derived from fruits and vegetables,  have generally been attributed to their anti -

inflammatory and antioxidant properties  68 . Given the  promising efficacy  of 

senolytics  in  help ing  achieve  healthy aging  with few side -effects , there  is 

considerable interest in discovering novel senolytics , particularly those of natural 

origin . Naturally occurring senolytics may be less pharmacologically potent,  but 

might cause lower toxicity than synthetic analogs . The first  generation of  senolytics ,

such as  dasatinib, quercetin, fisetin and ABT -263 , emerged in mid -2010s  and  were 

derived  from targeted bioinformatics focus ing  on pathways  that protect senescent 

cells  against apoptosis  26, 27, 69 . In contrast,  several  subsequently  reported  senolytics 

were identified through high -throughput screens and mechanistic  studie s. However, 

many  of these senolytics  have side -effects or  intrinsic  limitations  to be translated 

into clinical  settings . For instance,  fisetin  ha s limited bioavailability,  while  ABT -263 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 26

can  cause thrombocytopenia and neutropenia in humans  70 . To date, discovery of 

novel senolytic compounds particularly those of polyphenolic origin remains highly 

attractive .

Polyphenols  comprise  a super family of plant -derived secondary metabolites, 

usually characterized by the presence of more than one phenolic group in the 

molecule, and can exist as either monomers or polymers  71 . Depending on their 

chemical structure, polyphenols can be classified as flavonoids, phenolic acids, 

stilbenes, lignans, curcuminoids, or tannins , several subgroups of phytochemicals 

that share common and key chemical features, partially explaining why they  appear 

to  generate similar favorable effects despite  differences in  chemical composition  72, 

> 73

. Flavonoids are  broadly distributed  across  fruits and vegetables, and represent a 

major  class of  natural senolytic  agents, including quercetin, curcumin, fisetin, 

luteolin  and PCC1  71, 74 . The senolytic potential of other polyphenol sub classes  has 

remain ed  relatively  underexplored.  In this study, we  found  senolytic potential of 

several  phenolic acid  molecules, specifically SAA, SAB and SAE,  which are mainly 

from the roots of  S. miltiorrhiza , and  validate d the  feasibility of  us ing these  small 

molecule compound s to  target  senescen t cells . Administration with these phenolic 

acids appeared to effectively delay or alleviate aging -related conditions.  Although a 

single biochemical process may not fully explain their pleiotropic pharmacological 

effects, we  unraveled  a functional  mechanism  that at least partially  explains how 

SAs eliminate senescent cells (Fig.  8p ). Our pre -clinical studies suggest 

translational potential of these senolytic SA compounds .

Ferroptosis is a form of programmed cell death  that is  different from apoptosis, 

pyroptosis and necrosis,  and  usually  occur s in an iron -dependent manner with 

distinct morphologic features and molecular mechanisms  75 . Loss of redox 

homeostasis causes intracellular accumulation of lipid peroxides,  promoting 

ferroptosis, in which lipid peroxidation is a major regulator  76 . Metabolic pathways 

triggering increased redox -reactive molecules  including  iron, enzymatic lipid 

peroxidation, ROS/reactive nitrogen species (RNS), and failure of endogenous 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 27

antioxidant systems, mainly  GPX4 /glutathione (GSH) and coenzyme Q, can fuel 

ferroptosis  77 . Linked to iron accumulation, ferroptosis elicits dysfunction of 

antioxidant systems, favoring lipid peroxide production and cell membrane damage, 

and ultimately, cell death.  The signaling pathways eliciting ferroptosis are 

paradoxically associated with those protecting cells against iron excess and/or lipid -

derived ROS. In this study, we found senescent cells have increased expression of 

GPX4, an antioxidant factor that inhibi ts ferroptosis, enabling them to have anti -

ferroptotic potential.  This  is consi st ent with a recent  stud y reporting  that  senescent 

cells rely on GPX4 to  avoid  ferroptosis and that GPX4 -specific  inhibitors kill 

senescent cells  78 . Upon treatment with SA s, accelerated senescent cell  death 

was observed,  a process  that was  mediated  partially  by  interfering with the  GSTP1 -

GPX4 pathway to  result in increased  ferropto sis . In contrast to a recently reported 

prodrug nanoplatform , which was developed  as a  laser -free photodynamic therapy 

to  degrade ferritin  and  trigger ferroptosis  in  senescent cells  79 , SAs have the 

advantage of serving as naturally derived senolytic agents  with  relatively  low cost ,

high  safety and  bioavailability. 

Glutathione  S-transferases (GST s) catalyz e conjugation of electrophilic 

compounds to endogenous nucleophilic glutathione substrate s, a reaction that 

eliminates endogenous and exogenous toxic compounds, especially electrophiles 

> 80

. Although these enzymes generally  interact with various kinases to modulate both 

cell proliferation and p rogrammed cell death processes  such as apoptosis , GSTP1 

specifically catalyzes conjugation of electrophiles with glutathione during 

detoxification and plays an important role in regulating oxidative stress  81 . Loss of 

GSTP1 can increase oxidative stress,  alter  mitogen -activated protein (MAP) kinase 

and NF -κB signaling, enhance caspase -3 cleavage and induce apoptosis  82 .

Genetic modulation of GSTP1 -related  axis or pharmacological inhibition of GSTP1's 

catalytic activity sensitize s cancer  cell s to Food and Drug Administration (FDA) -

approved ferroptosis -inducing  agents  42 . Here , we identified GSTP1 as a target of 

SAA, SAB and SAE,  as it  mediates apoptosis /ferroptosis -inducing effect s of these 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 28

SA compounds.  Inhibitor -mediated GSTP1 targeting (such as by  LAS17  or 

Ezatiostat) enhanced  death  of senescent cells, resembling the pattern observed 

upon exposure of these cells to SA compounds, implying GSTP1 plays an anti -

apoptotic  and anti -ferroptotic  role in senescent cells and supports their long -term 

survival.  Moreover, e xpression of GSTP1 can  also  inhibit cellular ferroptosis by 

decreasing acyl -CoA synthetase long chain family member 4 (ACSL4)  activity  and 

increasing GSH content  83 . Consistent with this, senescent cells exhibited ferroptotic 

activity when GTSP1 was selectively targeted, suggesting anti -ferroptotic effects of 

this enzyme during cellular senescence that differs from its anti -apoptotic potential. 

The se  findings are in line with  our  data from SA -associated assays,  indicat ing that 

SA s promote programmed death of senescent cells  via  induction of both apoptosis 

and ferroptosis. 

Our  RNA -seq and immunoblot data suggest that both  ACSL4  and GPX4 are 

upregulated in senescent cells, allowing the formation of a pro -ferroptotic and anti -

ferroptotic balance , at least on the  ferroptosis  arm . Disruption of this balance, for 

example, by SA molecules  or GSTP1 inhibitors, can compromise cell survival 

potential  via  programmed cell death pathways  including  ferroptosis  and apoptosis. 

Of note, we demonstrated the mechanism allowing SA compounds to induce 

ferroptosis in senescent cells, which is mediated by disengagement of the 

GSTP1/JNK/c -Jun pathway to downregulate GPX4 and disrupt the inherent anti -

ferroptotic balance of senescent cel ls. Indeed, the interaction between GSTP1 and 

JNK/c -Jun can also  be observed in the case of galangin -alleviated doxorubicin -

induced cardiotoxicity,  wherein  JNK/c -Jun pathway  was  deactivat ed  and ferroptosis 

was  inhibited  44 . GSTP1 -mediated resistance to both apoptosis and ferroptosis of 

senescent cells is somehow reminiscent of  p21 , a  master regulator  that  orchestrates 

a multi -faceted defense network  to  suppress ferroptosis and cuproptosis by 

governing redox and metal ion homeostasis , a case reported  for  resistant cancers 

> 84

. In senescent cells, e ngagement of both anti -ferropto tic and anti -apoptotic  survival 

activities suggest s a complex and intricate regulato ry mechanism supporting  the 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 29

SCAP network,  which  merits further investigation  across different cell  lineages  and 

various  species  including rodents and  primates .

While our study provides valuable insights into the targets of SA compounds 

and sets a cornerstone for future research, it is essential to recognize the limitations 

of molecular modeling and the  necessity  for extended validation by medicinal 

chemistry , such as  using computational chemistry methods that encompass 

quantum mechanics and molecular dynamics  85 . SA compounds  herein  emerge as 

a subset of  promising  natural  candidate s for effective seno lysis , and further 

investigation may unlock  their  full potential for  improving  health and  enhancing 

longevity.  Of note, most senolytics reported so far kill senescent cells by engaging 

the apoptotic pathway  via  interference with signal transduction in the SCAP network. 

Our study indicates that senescent cells have both anti -apoptotic and anti -ferroptotic 

defenses and point to new approaches for targeting senescent cells.  A recent study 

defined an iron -triggered, ACSL4 -governed and lipid peroxidation -driven progr am 

that arises with age across diverse cell types and multiple organs in non -human 

primates  86 . Termed as ferro -aging, this process is triggered by iron  (particularly 

ferrous ) overload and lipid peroxidation,  operates in a chronic  and  low -grade mode ,

mechanistically coupl ing  iron dysregulation to progressive cellular senescence and 

organismal aging.  It is noteworthy that  ferro -aging  distinguishes  from acute 

ferroptosis , one of the major death modalities of senescent cells discussed in this 

study .

Agents with senolytic effects in murine models have advanced into early phase 

clinical trials for senescence -related pathologies. Among these are natural products 

and re -purposed drugs.  The most comprehensively studied senolytics  include  “D + 

Q”, fisetin, piperlongumine, UBX0101,  curcumin  and analogues such as  EF24  2, 11 .

Early preclinical studies have yielded promising results, although much further work 

remains to be done to test the geroprotective potential of these senolytic agents  15, 

> 18

. Compared to vehicle -treated control, intermittent administration of senolytics can 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 30

alleviate physical dysfunction of aged or diseased animals.  Intermittent “D + Q” 

administration appears to have acceptable safety profiles in clinical trials for several 

senescence -related conditions  87 . The preclinical SA regimens we tested appear to 

be feasible, safe, and effective and can improve overall health in 20 -month -old and 

24 -27 -month -old mice.  SA compounds show promise in preventing cognitive 

dysfunction in prematurely aged animals. These preclinical data support moving 

towards phase I clinical trials to explore safety and feasibility SA compounds and 

potentially future clinical trials of target  engagement, efficacy, and effectiveness for 

senescence -related disorders and diseases. 

Although median lifespan is increasing globally, healthspan is not  88 . Hence, 

geroprotective interventions that may close this disability gap by enhancing 

healthspan are needed. Research involving screening, design and development of 

senolytic drugs to selectively eliminate senescent cells is becoming a biomedical 

science p riority. However, much work is needed to facilitate clinical use of senolytic 

agents and increase knowledge of their molecular targets and associated pathways. 

The current study provides proof -of -concept evidence to support targeting 

senescent cells with a n emerging group of natural polyphenols, namely  phenolic 

acids,  to improve overall health in old age.  It appears SA compounds exert senolytic 

activity by binding to  GSTP1,  altering its protein stability and compromising its 

antioxidant capacity. Despite potential challenges for establishing the safety and 

effectiveness of these agents in future clinical trials, SA compounds add to the 

reservoir of geroprotective drugs and m ay one day contribute to personalized 

solutions for extending healthspan of humans. We propose that SA compounds, 

which appear to be a novel category of natural compound senolytic agents, hold 

promise for future translational clinic trials, particularly th ose in the elderly to 

increase remaining healthspan. 

Me thods 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 31

Cell culture 

The h uman prostate primary normal stromal cell line PSC27 was a gift from Dr. Peter 

Nelson (Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center) and maintained in stromal complete 

medium as described previously  22 . The h uman  fetal  lung normal fibroblast line IMR90 

and  human primary  normal umbilical vein endothelial cell line , HUVEC s were from 

ATCC and cultured with  EMEM  medium supplemented with 10% FBS or  vascular cell 

basal media supplemented with endothelial cell growth kit components with addition 

of human recombinant VEGF, respectively . The human adipose tissue -derived 

mesenchymal stem cell (AT -MSC) line was from ATCC and cultured in MSC basal 

medium (2% FBS) with 10 ng/ml bFGF and 10  μg/ml recombinant human insulin as 

reported  89 . The human p rostate epithelial cancer cell line , PC3 , was from ATCC and 

cultured with F-12K media (10% FBS). All lines were tested for  Mycoplasma 

contamination and  authenticated with STR assays. 

Cell treatments 

Stromal cells were grown until 80% confluent (CTRL) and treated with 50  μg/ml 

bleomycin (BLEO). Cells were rinsed briefly with PBS and maintained for 8 -10 d prior 

to performing  experiments . For drug screening of potential senolytics, natural 

candidates (totally 55 in the NMA library) (TargetMol anti -aging compound library 

L8200 TCM subset) were tested, each at 3  μg/ml  for survival of 5.0  ☓ 10 3 control and 

senescent cells for 3 d. Subsequent evaluation  of effects of these candidate agents 

(each applied at 1  μg/ml ) was conducted to test  the extent of SASP suppression (as 

potential senomorphics).  For agents showing promise for being effective and safe 

senolytics , further assays were performed. The phytochemical substances SAA, SAB 

and SAE were primarily examined  over  the range of 1 to 400  μM, with 100  μM, 100 

μM and 50  μM determined to  be  the lowest effective concentration s for senolytic 

activity, respectively. The positive control senolytics ABT -263 (navitoclax) and PCC1 

were applied at 1.25  μM and 50  μM, respectively.  GSTP1 inhibitors  LA S17 and 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 32

Ezatiostat were used at 10  μM.  Cell death suppressors QVD, VX -765, Nec -1s and 

LIP were applied at 10  μM, 20 nM, 20 nM and 200 nM, respectively.  MG -132, 

chloroquine, bafilomycin, SP600125, JNK -IN -8, Ferrostatin -1, Liproxstatin -1 and 

LAS17 were used at 10  μM, 10  μM, 10  nM, 20  μM, 2  μM, 1  μM, 200  nM  and 10  μM, 

respectively .

Bulk RNA -seq and bioinformatics 

Total RNA samples were prepared from senescent PSC27 cells cultured with regular 

media or media containing SA compounds (10  μM) for 3 consecutive days. Sample 

quality was validated by Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent) and RNA was subject to 

sequencing by Illumina NovaSeq 6000, with gene expression levels quantified by the 

software package RSEM ( https://deweylab.github.io/RSEM/ ). Briefly,  rRNAs in the 

RNA samples were eliminated using the RiboMinus Eukaryote kit (Qiagen), and 

strand -speci fi c RNA -seq libraries were generated using the  TruSeq Stranded Total 

RNA preparation kit  (Illumina) according to the manufacturer’s instructions before 

deep sequencing. 

Pair -end transcriptomic reads were mapped to the reference genome 

(GRCh38.p14 ) (Genome Reference Consortium Human Build 38; INSDC Assembly 

GCA_000001405.28 , 12.2013) (http://asia.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Info/Index )

(ensembl_105)  with reference annotation from  GENCODE v42  using the Bowtie tool. 

Duplicate reads were identified using picard tools (1.98) script mark duplicates 

(https://github.com/broadinstitute/picard) and only non -duplicate reads were retained. 

Reference splice junctions are provided by a reference transcrip tome (Ensembl build 

73)  90 . FPKM values were calculated using Cufflinks, with differential gene expression 

called by the Cuffdiff maximum -likelihood estimate function  91 . Genes of significantly 

changed expression were defined by a false discovery rate (FDR) -corrected  P value 

< 0.05. Only ensembl genes 73 of status “known” and biotype “coding” were used for 

downstream analysis. 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 33

Reads were trimmed using Trim Galore (v0.6.1) 

(http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/trim_galore/) and quality 

assessed using FastQC (v0.10.0) 

(http://www.bioinformatics.bbsrc.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/ ). Differentially expressed 

genes (DEGs) were subsequently analyzed for enrichment of biological themes using 

the DAVID bioinformatics platform (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/ ) and the Ingenuity 

Pathways Analysis program ( http://www.ingenuity.com/index.html ). Raw data  from 

bulk RNA -seq were deposited in the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) 

database under the accession codes  GSE216218,  GSE279345,  GSE275945 .

Venn diagrams 

Venn diagrams and associated empirical  P-values were generated using the 

USeq (v7.1.2) tool IntersectLists  92 . The  t-value used was 22,008, as the total number 

of genes of status “known” and biotype “coding” in ensembl genes 73. The number 

of iterations used was 1,000. 

RNA -seq heatmaps 

For each gene, the FPKM value was calculated based on aligned reads, using 

Cufflinks  91 . Z -scores were generated from FPKMs. Hierarchical clustering was 

performed using the R package heatmap.2 and the distfun = “pearson” and hclustfun 

= “average”. 

Pulldown of SA compound -bound proteins 

PSC27 cells were lysed in IP lysate buffer on ice with protease and phosphatase 

inhibitors, then centrifuged at 4°C  for 10 min and the supernatant was collected and 

subjected to protein quantification by BCA method. The supernatant was divided into 

4 equal parts, treated with biotin or biotin -SAA (100  μM) with unlabeled SAA in IP 

buffer overnight at 4°C ( other SA compounds treated in a similar manner ).  The next 

day, 30  μl streptavidin -agarose beads ( Sigma -Aldrich, USA ) were  added  for binding 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 34

for 2 h at 4 °C . After  3 rinses  with IP buffer, proteins in beads were eluted, separated 

by SDS -PAGE and stained with silver or directly subjected to sample separation for 

MS analysis.  The resultant proteomic data of MS were deposited to the 

ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) 

through the iProX partner repository with a unique dataset identifier  PXD056831. 

20K HuProt ™ human protein microarrays 

The HuProt ™ Human protein Microarray covers approximately 20,000 full -length 

human proteins  93 . Proteins tagged with GST were expressed and purified using a 

eukaryotic expression system, with each protein repeated on the microarray. SA 

compounds were biotin -labeled and processed alongside the microarrays. The 

microarray images were analyzed using G enePix Pro v6.0 software, with signal 

intensities of the background, positive, and negative control spots quantified. In this 

experiment, D -biotin served as the positive reference at 635 nm, with BSA and buffer 

acting as negative controls. After normalizat ion of the data, proteins meeting the Z -

score threshold in both replicates were selected as those binding to SA compounds 

in microarray experiments. 

Cellular thermal shift assay (CETSA) 

To assess whether SAA (or other SA compounds) physically targets GSTP1 protein, 

CETSA -immunoblot experiments were carried out. CETSA was used to determine 

the binding ef fi ciency of a drug to its targeting protein. Briefly,  PSC27 cells in culture 

were trypsinized and  precipitated by centrifugation,  lysed on ice with  IP lysis  buffer 

containing protease inhibitor cocktail and centrifuged at 14,000 × g at 4 °C  for 20 min. 

Each lysate was then equally aliquoted into several parts in  Eppendorf tube s, 

incubated with SAA (or other SAs) at  room temperature for 1 h.  Samples were  heated 

for 3 min at different  temperatures (25, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50 °C ). The precipitated proteins 

were separated from the soluble fraction by centrifugation, and boiled at 95 °C  for 

10  min.  Samples were then analyzed by  immunoblotting .

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 35

Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) assays 

The binding affinity of SAA (or other SA compounds) to recombinant human GSTP1 

(rhGSTP1 ) was determined using  Biacore T200 instrument equipped with CM5 

sensor chips (GE Healthcare)  94 . Briefly, rhGSTP1  protein ( SinoBiological ) was 

diluted in sodium acetate solution (pH 4.5) to a final concentration of 30 μg/ml.  GSTP1 

protein was immobilized on a CM5 sensor chip (GE Healthcare) by amine  and 

allowed to couple with the final immobilization densities of 5,400 RU. Immobilized 

GSTP1  protein was then applied to capture SAA  (or other SAs) . The running buffer 

contained PBS -P (10 mM sodium phosphate, 150 mM NaCl, 0.05% surfactant P20, 

pH 7.3) and 5% DMSO. The pH was changed from 7.0 to 4.5 to adj ust the binding 

affinity  over  several pH environments. Experiments were performed at 25 °C, with a 

series of concentrations (25, 12.5, 6.25, 3.125, 1.56 and 0.78  μM) of SAA 

(concentrations of other SAs may vary)  analyzed at a flow rate of 30 μl/min, with an 

injection  time of 60 s and a dissociation time of 60 s  in each binding cycle . A blank 

immobilization was performed on one channel surface of the chip to adjust the binding 

response. Association and dissociation constants were acquired using the Biacore 

T200 Evaluation software (v3.0 GE Healthcare). Data w ere  exported to  GraphPad 

Prism to plot the final curves. 

Nano -LC -MS/MS for proteomic analysis 

Peptides were resolved in 0.1% formic acid, with peptide concentration measured 

with the BCA protein quantification kit. Samples were separated utilizing an analytic 

column (75  μm × 15 cm; 3  μm; 100Å) (C -18, Thermo Scientific) on a nanoflow HPLC 

Easy -nLC 1 200 system (Thermo Scientific), following a 120 min LC gradient at 300 

nl/min. Buffer A comprising 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in H 2O and Buffer B comprising 0.1% 

(v/v) formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. The solution gradient: 1% –5% B in 5 min; 5% -

26% B in  85  min ; 26% -37% B in  20  min; 37% -100% B in  5 min; 90% B in 5 min. MS 

analyses were conducted on a Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo 

Scientific). MS scan was performed in positive ion mode with spray voltage at 1,900 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 36

V and ion transfer tube temperature at 320 ℃. Xcalibur software was used to acquire 

profile spectrum data in  a data -dependent acquisition pattern (DDA).  The MS1 full 

scan was set at a resolution of 60,000 @ m/z 200,  AGC target 4e5 and maximum IT 

50 ms by Orbitrap mass analyzer (350 -1600 m/z),  followed by ‘top 15’ MS2 scans 

generated by HCD fragmentation at a resolution of 15,000 @ m/z 200,  AGC target 

5e4 and maximum IT 50 ms. Isolation window was set at 1.6 m/z.  The normalized 

collision energy (NCE) was set  at NCE 30%, and the dynamic exclusion time was 30 

s.  Precursors with charge 1, 7, 8 and > 8 were excluded for MS2 analysis. 

All raw Xcalibur files acquired from MS runs were analyzed using the default 

settings of  Proteome Discoverer 2.4  (Thermo Scientific)  with minor modifications. 

Enzyme specification during the search was trypsin. Carbamidomethylation of 

cysteine was selected as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine and N -

terminal acetylation were selected as variable modification s. Mass tolerances for 

precursor and fragment ions were set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Da respectively. The 

SEQUEST search algorithm was used to search MS/MS spectra against a composite 

database comprised of all the Swissprot  homo sapiens  database comprising 20,423 

sequences ( downloaded in August, 2023). Minimum cutoff for peptide length was set 

at 7 amino acids, and maximum permissible missed cleavage was set at 2. Maximal 

FDR for peptide spectral match, proteins and site was set to 0.01. 

Modelling of SAA/SAB/SAE binding to GSTP1 by molecular docking 

The amino acid sequences of  SAA/SAB/SAE  (code: P09211) were acquired from 

UniProt. The X -ray diffraction microscopy structure of GSTP1 (PDB ID: 2A2R) was 

derived from RCSB Protein Data Bank (PDB,  https://www.rcsb.org/ ). Water molecules 

farther than 4.5 Å from the receptor were removed. The structures of  SAA/SAB/SAE 

were obtained from PubChem ( https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ ), with the ligand -

receptor interactions imitated by docking and analyzing  with the ‘Triangle Matcher’ 

placement method  with the molecular operating environment (MOE) software 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 37

(2019.01.02) using the MMFF94 force field with the gradient convergence set to 0.1 

kcal/mol. All protein structures were then prepared by the built -in MOE structure 

preparation and Protonate3D software tools using the default parameters  illustrated 

with open source PyMOL software . The binding site of each protein was generated 

by the SiteFinder module in MOE. All conformations  per  ligand were scored using the 

‘London dG’ scoring function, submitted to a refinement step based on molecular 

mechanics and resco red with the ‘GBVI/WSA dG’ scoring function, a force field -based 

scoring function that determines the binding free energy (kcal/mol) of the ligand from 

a given pose. Ultimately, the binding mode with the best docking score was selected 

for next step analys is. The docking score denotes the affinity between the protein 

receptor and the docking ligand. The lower docking score indicates the better affinity 

> 95

.

Microscale thermophoresis (MST) 

To substantiate the binding of SA compounds to wildtype and mutant  GSTP1 , we 

generated  GSTP1  constructs encoding the wildtype protein and its mutant 

(Cys10 1Ser  or Cys47 Ser ) tagged with a GFP reporter and overexpressed them in 

293T cells. The cell sublines were lysed 48 h afterwards for MST analysis using Nano 

Temper Monolith NT Labelfree instrument (Nano Temper Technologies). A series of 

concentrations of  SAs  (800, 400, 200, 100, 50, 25, 12.5, 6.25,3.2, 1.6 and 0.8  μM)

were mixed with  GSTP1  protein in solution. After incubation at room temperature for 

5 min, the mixtures were loaded into MO -AK002  capillaries. MST assessments were 

performed with 20% MST power and 20% LED power. MST datasets were processed 

using the NT analysis 1.5.41 software (Nano Temper) .

Immunoblot and immunofluorescence assays 

Whole cell lysates were prepared using RIPA lysis buffer supplemented with 

protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Biomake). Nitrocellulose membranes were 

incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies, and HRP -conjugated goat anti -

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 38

mouse or  -rabbit served as secondary antibodies (Vazyme). For immunofluorescence 

analysis, cells were fixed with 4% formaldehyde and permeabilized before incubation 

with primary and secondary antibodies, each for 1 h.  After  counterstaining with DAPI 

(0.5 μg/ml), samples were examined with an Imager A2. Axio (Zeiss) upright 

microscope to analyze specific gene expression. 

Intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) examination 

Levels of intracellular ROS were determined using a ROS Assay Kit (Beyotime), 

which employs dichloro -dihydro -fluorescein diacetate (DCFH -DA) as a probe. Briefly, 

cells were cultured in 6 -well plates for 24 h at 37°C and were then washed twice with 

serum -fr ee medium. The medium containing 10  μM DCFH -DA was added. Cells were 

then incubated for 20 min at 37°C, with light avoided during incubation. After 

incubation, the cells were washed thrice with serum -free medium, then observed and 

photographed using a fluo rescence microscope (Nikon). The fluorescence intensity 

was measured using ImageJ (v1.51, NIH). 

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) 

Stromal cells were subject to various treatments for 24  h before precipitation was 

collected in 2  ml centrifuge tubes after trypsinization. The precipitation was incubated 

with TEM fixative at 4  °C for 2 h and suspended to be wrapped in the heated 1  %

agar ose before solidification, with re -suspension and washing in 0.1 M phosphate 

buffer (PB) repeated for 2 more times (3 min each). Cells were post -fixed with 1  %

OsO 4 in 0.1 M PB at room temperature for 2 h. Afterward, cells were sequentially 

dehydrated in a graded ethanol series (30  %, 50  %, 70  %, 80  %, 95  %, 100  %, 100  %) 

for 20  min at each solution and two changes of acetone (15 min each). The cells were 

then penetr ated and embedded with the sequential infiltration of the following formula: 

acetone: EMBed 812  = 1:1 for 2 -4 h at 37  °C; acetone: EMBed 812  = 1:2 overnight 

at 37  °C; pure EMBed 812 for 5 -8h at 37  °C. The cells were inserted into the pure 

EMBed812 in the e mbedding models and kept in 37  °C overnight before the models 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 39

were moved into 65  °C to polymerize for over 48 h. Ultrathin sections (60 -80  nm) 

were obtained on the ultramicrotome, and fished out onto the 150 meshes cuprum 

grids with formvar film. The slices were post -stained with 2  % uranium acetate 

saturated alcohol  solution and 2.6  % lead citrate avoiding CO 2 before dried overnight 

at room temperature. The cuprum grids were observed under TEM, with images 

captured on the spot. 

Lipid peroxidation activity assay 

The BODIPY 581/591 C11 kit  (MedChemExpress)  was used to detect the lipid 

peroxidation activity of cell samples. First, the cell samples were digested with trypsin 

to make a single -cell suspension. After centrifugation, the supernatant was discarded, 

washed twice with PBS, and then 1  ml of BODIPY 581 /591 C11 (lipid peroxidation 

sensor)  working solution was added and incubated at room temperature for 30  min. 

The supernatant was then centrifuged and washed twice with PBS.  Cells were 

resuspended in serum -free m edium and analyzed by fluorescent microscop y.

GPX4  promoter  activity assay  with reporter  system 

To clone the enhancer/promoter region of human  GPX4 , a  1000 -bp  non -encoding 

region immediately upstream of the  transcription start site of  human  GPX4  gene was 

amplified by PCR and inserted into the multiple cloning site of  pGL4.22[luc2CP Puro] 

firefly luciferase reporter vector  (Promega , USA)  between NdeI and HindIII restriction 

sites. The resulting construct was used to transfect PSC27 cells, together with 

pGL4.22 -Rluc -Neo vector  (Promega , USA)  for signal normalization. To apply the 

Dual -Luciferase® Reporter Assay System (DLR)  (Promega , USA) , a 1:1:8 ratio of 

either Rluc (Renilla): Fluc (firefly): construct  DNA was followed. SAA, SAB or SAE was 

added to cell culture, and cells were collected for lysis and luciferase signal analysis 

12 h  after .

Experimental mice and chemotherapeutic studies 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 40

Animals were maintained in a specific pathogen -free (SPF) facility, with  M-NSG 

(NOD -PrkdcscidIl2rgem1/Smoc)  (Shanghai  Model Organisms ) mice at an age of 

approximately 6 weeks (~20 g body weight)  being  used. Ten mice were incorporated 

into each group, with xenografts subcutaneously generated at the hind flank under 

isoflurane inhalation. Stromal cells (PSC27) were mixed with cancer cells (PC3) at a 

ratio of 1:4 (i.e., 250,000 stromal cells admixed with  1,000,000 cancer cells to make 

tissue recombinants before implantation  in vivo ). Animals were sacrificed at 2 -8

weeks after implantation, according to tumor burden and/or experimental 

requirements. Tumor growth was monitored weekly, with tumor volume (v) m easu red 

and calculated according to  tumor length (l), width (w) and height (h) by the formula: 

v = ( π/6) × (( l+w+h)/3) 3 96 . Freshly dissected tumors were either snap -frozen or fixed 

to prepare FFPE samples. Resulting sections were used for IHC staining against 

specific antigens or subject ed  to hematoxylin/eosin staining. 

For chemoresistance studies, animals received subcutaneous implantation of 

tissue recombinants as described above and were given standard laboratory diets for 

2 weeks to allow tumor uptake and growth initiation. Starting from the 3 rd  week 

(tumors reaching 4 -8 mm in diameter), MIT (0.2 mg/kg doses), the senolytic agent 

SAA (20.0 mg/kg doses, 200  μl/dose) (or other SA compounds) or vehicle controls 

were administered  by  intraperitoneal injection  (therapeutic agents  via  i.p.), on the 1 st 

day of 3 rd , 5 th  and 7 th  week, respectively. Upon completion of the 8 -week therapeutic 

regimen, animals were sacrificed, with tumor volumes recorded and tissues 

processed for histological evaluation. 

At the end of chemotherapy and/or targeting treatment, animals were 

anaesthetized and peripheral blood was gathered  via  cardiac puncture. Blood was 

transferred into a 1.5 ml Eppendorf tube and kept on ice for 45 min, followed by 

centrifugation at 9000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C . Clear supernatants containing serum 

were collected and transferred into a sterile 1.5 ml Eppendorf tube. All serum markers 

were measured using dry -slide technology on IDEXX VetTest 8008 chemistry 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 41

analyzer (IDEXX). About 50  μl of the serum sample were loaded on the VetTest 

pipette tip before  being  securely fit ted  on the pipettor and manufacturer’s instructions 

were followed for further examination. 

Whole body irradiation of wildtype animals 

Wildtype experimental animals were housed in a SPF facility at an ambient 

temperature of 22 -25°C with 30% humidity, under a 12 h light/12 h dark cycle (6 am -

6 pm), with free access to food and were fed ad  libitum. For induction of  in vivo 

senescence,  C57BL/6J  mice (males, Shanghai Lingchang Biotechnology) at  8-10

weeks of age were exposed to a sublethal dose (5 Gy) of whole body irradiation (WBI). 

Four  weeks later, animals were injected with 20.0 mg/kg  SAA  (or other SA compounds) 

or vehicle  via i.p.  twice  per  week for  eight  consecutive weeks. Mice that had 

undergone WBI typically manifested an abnormal body appearance including 

markedly greyed hair, but  this was partly  reversed by SA compound administration. 

Y-maze test 

Spontaneous alternation behavior indicates the tendency for mice to alternate their 

(conventionally) non -reinforced choices on successive  iterations  97 . The Y -maze 

spontaneous alternation was employed to assess short -time spatial recognition and 

working memory of mice by measurement of spontaneous alternations  98 . The maze 

consisted of 3 arms positioned at a 120° angle from each other, with each arm 31 cm 

long, 5 cm wide or 10 cm high, respectively. Each arm had markers of different colors 

as distinct visual cues. After placed individually at the center of the app aratus, mice 

were allowed to explore freely through the maze during an 8 -min session. Alternation 

was defined as successive entries into all 3 arms on overlapping triplet sets. The 

number of arm entries and alternations were recorded visually to calculate  the 

percentage of the alternation behavior with the following formula: % Alternation = 

[Number of alternations/ (Total number of arm entries  - 2)] x 100. Spontaneous 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 42

alternation (%), defined as successive entries into 3 arms on overlapping triplet sets, 

is associated with short -term spatial learning memory. 

Senescent cell clearance and animal lifespan extension 

For preclinical trials involving naturally aged animals, wildtype  C57BL/6J  mice 

(including both males and females, with sex generally not considered in study design) 

were maintained in a specific SPF facility at  22 -25 °C and 30% humidity under 12 h 

light/12 h dark cycle (6 am -6 pm) . Mice were allowed to have  free access to a 

standard rodent chow diet (5LOD, PicoLab), with water  provided  ad libitum . The 

experimental procedure was approved by the IACUC at Shanghai Institute of 

Nutritional and Health, Chinese A cademy of Sciences  or  Binzhou Medical University ,

with all  animals conducted in accordance with the guidelines for animal experiments 

defined by the  relevant  IACUC. 

To determine the impact of SA compound administration on animal lifespan, 20 -

month -old naturally aging  wildtype  C57BL/6J  mice were employed, which were 

generally sorted according to their body weight and randomly assigned to vehicle, a 

SA compound or PCC1 intervention group s. Animals were treated once every 2 

weeks, in an intermittent manner for 4 months before  being  subject ed  to physical 

tests at 24 months of age. For preclinical trials involving lifespan extension at 

advanced stage, we used animals  starti ng at 24 -27 months of age (equivalent to 

human age of 75 -90 years) . Mice (both sexes) were treated once every 2 weeks 

(biweekly) with vehicle, each SA compound (SAA, SAB or SAE) or PCC1  by  i.p. 

injection  (20.0 mg/kg doses for each  SA compound or PCC1 , respectively)  for 3 

consecutive days. Some mice were moved from their original cages during the study 

to minimize single cage -housing stress. RotaRod  (TSE system)  and hanging tests 

were performed for monthly measurement of maximal speed and hanging endurance, 

respectively, as these tests are considered sensitive and noninvasive. Mice were 

euthanized and scored as having died if displaying more than one of the follow ing 

signs: (i) incapable o f drink ing  or e ating ; (ii) reluctant to move even upon exterior 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 43

stimulus; (iii) rapid gross weight loss; (iv) severe balance disorder; or (v) bleeding or 

ulcerated skin. No animals was lost due to fighting, accidental death or dermatitis. 

The Cox proportional hazard model was used for survival appraisal. 

All animal experiments were performed in compliance with NIH Guide for the 

Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (National Academies Press, 2011) and the 

ARRIVE guidelines, and were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use 

Committee (IACUC) of Shangh ai Institute of Nutrition and Health, Chinese Academy 

of Sciences  and  Binzhou Medical University .

Tissue SA -β-gal staining and histological examination 

For SA -β-gal staining, frozen sections were dried at 37°C for 20 -30 min before fixed 

for 15 min at room temperature. The frozen sections were washed  3 times  with PBS 

and incubated with SA -β-Gal staining reagent (Beyotime) overnight at 37°C . After 

completion of SA -β-gal staining, sections were stained with eosin for 1 -2 min, rinsed 

under running water for 1  min, differentiated in 1% acid alcohol for 10 -20  s, and 

washed again under running water for 1  min. Sections were dehydrated in increasing 

concentrations of alcohol and cleared in xylene. After drying, samples were examined 

under a bright -field microscope. 

Histology and immunohistochemistry 

Preclinical specimens from mouse tissues were fixed overnight in 10% neutral -

buffered formalin and processed for paraffin embedding. For histological evaluation, 

standard staining with hematoxylin/eosin was performed on sections of 6 -8 μm 

thickness cut fro m each specimen block. For immunohistochemistry, tumor 

specimens were first fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and embedded in paraffin. For 

appraisal, tissue sections were cut from FFPE chunks, deparaffinized and incubated 

in 10 mM sodium citrate buffer (pH 6.5 ) at 95 °C  for 40 min for antigen retrieval. 

Peroxidase activity was quenched with 3% H 2O2 and tissues were blocked in 5% 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 44

bovine serum albumin for 30 min, before incubated with primary antibodies ( e.g ., 

against IL6 or cleaved caspase 3 [CCL3]), for SASP  factor analysis  or cell apoptosis 

evaluation, respectively) overnight at 4 °C . After 3 washes with PBS, tissue sections 

were incubated with biotinylated secondary antibody (1:200 dilution, Vector 

Laboratories) for 1 h at room temperature then washed  3 times , after which 

streptavidin -horseradish peroxidase conjugates (Vector Laboratories) were added 

and the slides incubated for 45 min. DAB solution was then added and slides 

counterstained with haematoxylin. Alternatively, frozen tissue sections were used for 

immunofluorescence staining to probe target protein expression in animals re ceiving 

the  various preclinical treatments, with counterstaining performed with DAPI. Images 

were then captured with  an  epifluorescence microscope. 

Appraisal of  in vivo  cytotoxicity by blood tests 

For routine blood examination, 100  μl  fresh blood was acquired from each animal and 

mixed with EDTA immediately. The blood samples were analyzed with Celltac Alpha 

MEK -6400 series hematology analyzers (Nihon Kohden). For serum biochemical 

analyses, blood samples were collected and clotted for  2 h at room temperature or 

overnight at 4 ° C. An aliquot of approximately 50  μl  serum was subject to analysis for 

creatinine, urea, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and alanine transaminase (ALT) by  an 

VetTest 8008 chemistry analyzer (IDEXX) as reported previou sly  96 . For blood cell 

tests, 50 μl fresh blood was collected from each mouse and mixed with EDTA 

immediately. Circulating levels of hemoglobin, white blood cells, lymphocytes and 

platelets of the blood samples were analyzed by Sysmex XN -1000 series automated 

hem atology analyzers (Sysmex, XN -1000). 

All animal experiments were conducted in compliance with the NIH Guide for the 

Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (National Academies Press, 2011) and the 

ARRIVE guidelines, and were approved by the IACUC of Shanghai Institute of 

Nutrition and Health, Chin ese Academy of Sciences.  For each preclinical regimen, 

animals were  monitored for  conditions including hypersensitivity (changes in body 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 45

temperature, altered breathing and ruffled fur), body weight, mortality and changes in 

behavior (i.e., loss of appetite and distress), and were disposed of appropriately 

according to the individual pathological severity as defined by relevant guidelines. 

Statistics and  reproducibility 

All  in vitro  experiments were performed in triplicate, while animal studies were 

conducted with at least 8 mice  per  group for most preclinical assays.  Data are 

presented as mean ± SD except where otherwise indicated. GraphPad Prism (9.5.1) 

was used to collect and analyze data, with  statistical significance determined 

according to individual settings. Cox proportional hazards regression model and 

multivariate Cox proportional hazards model analyses were performed with SPSS 

statistical software. Statistical significance  was determined by unpaired two -tailed 

Student’s  t-tests, one - or two -way ANOVA, Pearson’s correlation coefficients tests, 

Kruskal -Wallis, log -rank tests, Wilcoxon -Mann -Whitney tests or Fisher’s exact tests. 

For all statistical tests, a  P value < 0.05 was considered significant.  The sample size 

for each experiment was not predetermined by statistical method, and no data were 

excluded from analyses. 

Reporting summary 

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting 

Summary linked to this article. 

Data availability 

Experimental data supporting the plots within this  article  and other findings f rom  this 

study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. The 

RNA -seq data generated in the present study have been deposited in the Gene 

Expression Omnibus database under accession code GSE216218, GSE279345, 

GSE275945 . The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint

46 

ProteomeXchange Consortium  via  the PRIDE partner repository iProX  99  with the 

dataset identifier PXD056831. All data that support the  fi ndings of this study are 

available within the article and Supplementary Information. Source data are provided 

with this paper. A reporting summary for this article is available in the Supplementary 

Information. 

References 

1.  Khosla, S., Farr, J.N., Tchkonia, T. & Kirkland, J.L. The role of cellular senescence in ageing and 

endocrine disease.  Nat Rev Endocrinol  16 , 263 -275 (2020). 

2.  Sun, Y., Li, Q. & Kirkland, J.L. Targeting senescent cells for a healthier longevity: the roadmap 

for an era of global aging.  Life Med  1, 103 -119 (2022). 

3.  Langenberg, C., Hingorani, A.D. & Whitty, C.J.M. Biological and functional multimorbidity -from 

mechanisms to management.  Nat Med  29 , 1649 -1657 (2023). 

4.  Rolland, Y.  et al.  Challenges in developing Geroscience trials.  Nat Commun  14 , 5038 (2023). 

5.  de Souto Barreto, P.  et al.  Looking at frailty and intrinsic capacity through a geroscience lens: 

the ICFSR & Geroscience Task Force.  Nat Aging  3, 1474 -1479 (2023). 

6.  Hayflick, L. & Moorhead, P.S. The serial cultivation of human diploid cell strains.  Exp Cell Res 

25 , 585 -621 (1961). 

7.  Song, S., Lam, E.W., Tchkonia, T., Kirkland, J.L. & Sun, Y. Senescent Cells: Emerging Targets for 

Human Aging and Age -Related Diseases.  Trends in biochemical sciences  45 , 578 -592 (2020). 

8.  Song, S., Tchkonia, T., Jiang, J., Kirkland, J.L. & Sun, Y. Targeting Senescent Cells for a Healthier 

Aging: Challenges and Opportunities.  Adv Sci (Weinh)  7, 2002611 (2020). 

9.  Tchkonia, T. & Kirkland, J.L. Aging, Cell Senescence, and Chronic Disease: Emerging Therapeutic 

Strategies.  JAMA  320 , 1319 -1320 (2018). 

10.  Sun, Y., Coppe, J.P. & Lam, E.W. Cellular Senescence: The Sought or the Unwanted?  Trends Mol 

Med  24 , 871 -885 (2018). 

11.  Chaib, S., Tchkonia, T. & Kirkland, J.L. Cellular senescence and senolytics: the path to the clinic. 

Nat Med  28 , 1556 -1568 (2022). 

12.  Kirkland, J.L. & Tchkonia, T. Cellular Senescence: A Translational Perspective.  EBioMedicine  21 ,

21 -28 (2017). 

13.  Kirkland, J.L. & Tchkonia, T. Senolytic drugs: from discovery to translation.  Journal of internal 

medicine  288 , 518 -536 (2020). 

14.  Langhi Prata, L.G.P., Tchkonia, T. & Kirkland, J.L. Cell senescence, the senescence -associated 

secretory phenotype, and cancers.  PLoS biology  21 , e3002326 (2023). 

15.  Gonzales, M.M.  et al.  Senolytic therapy in mild Alzheimer's disease: a phase 1 feasibility trial. 

Nat Med  29 , 2481 -2488 (2023). 

16.  Justice, J.N.  et al.  Senolytics in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: Results from a first -in -human, 

open -label, pilot study.  EBioMedicine  40 , 554 -563 (2019). 

17.  Hickson, L.J.  et al.  Senolytics decrease senescent cells in humans: Preliminary report from a 

clinical trial of Dasatinib plus Quercetin in individuals with diabetic kidney disease. 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 47

EBioMedicine  47 , 446 -456 (2019). 

18.  Farr, J.N.  et al.  Effects of intermittent senolytic therapy on bone metabolism in postmenopausal 

women: a phase 2 randomized controlled trial.  Nat Med  30 , 2605 -2612 (2024). 

19.  Li, Z.M., Xu, S.W. & Liu, P.Q. Salvia miltiorrhizaBurge (Danshen): a golden herbal medicine in 

cardiovascular therapeutics.  Acta Pharmacol Sin  39 , 802 -824 (2018). 

20.  Shi, M., Huang, F., Deng, C., Wang, Y. & Kai, G. Bioactivities, biosynthesis and biotechnological 

production of phenolic acids in Salvia miltiorrhiza.  Crit Rev Food Sci Nutr  59 , 953 -964 (2019). 

21.  Zhang, B.Y.  et al.  The senescence -associated secretory phenotype is potentiated by 

feedforward regulatory mechanisms involving Zscan4 and TAK1.  Nat Commun  9, 1723 (2018). 

22.  Sun, Y.  et al.  Treatment -induced damage to the tumor microenvironment promotes prostate 

cancer therapy resistance through WNT16B.  Nat Med  18 , 1359 -1368 (2012). 

23.  Xu, Q.  et al.  Targeting amphiregulin (AREG) derived from senescent stromal cells diminishes 

cancer resistance and averts programmed cell death 1 ligand (PD -L1) -mediated 

immunosuppression.  Aging cell  18 , e13027 (2019). 

24.  Han, L.  et al.  Senescent Stromal Cells Promote Cancer Resistance through SIRT1 Loss -

Potentiated Overproduction of Small Extracellular Vesicles.  Cancer research  80 , 3383 -3398 

(2020). 

25.  Chang, J.  et al.  Clearance of senescent cells by ABT263 rejuvenates aged hematopoietic stem 

cells in mice.  Nat Med  22 , 78 -83 (2016). 

26.  Yosef, R.  et al.  Directed elimination of senescent cells by inhibition of BCL -W and BCL -XL.  Nat 

Commun  7, 11190 (2016). 

27.  Zhu, Y.  et al.  The Achilles' heel of senescent cells: from transcriptome to senolytic drugs.  Aging 

cell  14 , 644 -658 (2015). 

28.  Xu, Q.X.  et al.  The flavonoid procyanidin C1 has senotherapeutic activity and increases lifespan 

in mice.  Nature Metabolism  3, 1706 -1726 (2021). 

29.  Huang, J.  et al.  Adjuvant role of Salvia miltiorrhiza bunge in cancer chemotherapy: A review of 

its bioactive components, health -promotion effect and mechanisms.  J Ethnopharmacol  318 ,

117022 (2024). 

30.  Guo, M.  et al.  Pharmacological Components and Mechanism Research on the Treatment of 

Myelosuppression after Chemotherapy with Danggui Jixueteng Decoction Based on Spectrum -

Effect Relationships and Transcriptome Sequencing.  ACS Omega  9, 28926 -28936 (2024). 

31.  Yuan, J.Y. & Ofengeim, D. A guide to cell death pathways.  Nat Rev Mol Cell Bio  25 , 379 -395 

(2024). 

32.  Jiang, Y.L., Yu, Y.X., Pan, Z.Y., Wang, Z.Y. & Sun, M.Y. Ginsenoside RK1 Induces Ferroptosis in 

Hepatocellular Carcinoma Cells through an FSP1 -Dependent Pathway.  Pharmaceuticals -Base 

17  (2024). 

33.  Serrano, C.A.  et al.  Phytochemical analysis for ten Peruvian Mentheae (Lamiaceae) by liquid 

chromatography associated with high resolution mass spectrometry.  Scientific reports  13 ,

10714 (2023). 

34.  Ivanova, S., Dzhakova, Z., Staynova, R. & Ivanov, K. Salvia verticillata (L.) -Biological Activity, 

Chemical Profile, and Future Perspectives.  Pharmaceuticals (Basel)  17  (2024). 

35.  Zhu, J.  et al.  Salvianolic acid A attenuates non -alcoholic fatty liver disease by regulating the 

AMPK -IGFBP1 pathway.  Chem Biol Interact  400 , 111162 (2024). 

36.  Keshava Prasad, T.S.  et al.  Human Protein Reference Database --2009 update.  Nucleic Acids Res 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 48

37 , D767 -772 (2009). 

37.  Maglott, D., Ostell, J., Pruitt, K.D. & Tatusova, T. Entrez Gene: gene -centered information at 

NCBI.  Nucleic Acids Res  39 , D52 -57 (2011). 

38.  UniProt, C. The Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) in 2010.  Nucleic Acids Res  38 , D142 -148 

(2010). 

39.  Zhang, Y.  et al.  Tryptanthrin targets GSTP1 to induce senescence and increases the 

susceptibility to apoptosis by senolytics in liver cancer cells.  Redox Biol  76 , 103323 (2024). 

40.  Semprasert, N., Maneethorn, P. & Kooptiwut, S. The protective effect of imatinib against 

pancreatic beta -cell apoptosis induced by dexamethasone via increased GSTP1 expression and 

reduced oxidative stress.  Scientific reports  14 , 17691 (2024). 

41.  Ang, W.H.  et al.  Rational design of an organometallic glutathione transferase inhibitor.  Angew 

Chem Int Ed Engl  48 , 3854 -3857 (2009). 

42.  Zhang, W.  et al.  SMURF2 predisposes cancer cell toward ferroptosis in GPX4 -independent 

manners by promoting GSTP1 degradation.  Molecular cell  83 , 4352 -4369 e4358 (2023). 

43.  Crawford, L.A. & Weerapana, E. A tyrosine -reactive irreversible inhibitor for glutathione S -

transferase Pi (GSTP1).  Mol Biosyst  12 , 1768 -1771 (2016). 

44.  Shu, G.  et al.  Galangin alleviated Doxorubicin -induced cardiotoxicity by inhibiting ferroptosis 

through GSTP1/JNK pathway.  Phytomedicine  134 , 155989 (2024). 

45.  Wang, F.  et al.  Content Determination and Chemical Clustering Analysis of Tanshinone and 

Salvianolic Acid in Salvia spp.  Metabolites  14  (2024). 

46.  Zu, G., Zhou, T., Che, N. & Zhang, X. Salvianolic Acid A Protects Against Oxidative Stress and 

Apoptosis Induced by Intestinal Ischemia -Reperfusion Injury Through Activation of Nrf2/HO -1

Pathways.  Cell Physiol Biochem  49 , 2320 -2332 (2018). 

47.  Wang, Y.  et al.  Regulation of SIRT3/FOXO1 Signaling Pathway in Rats with Non -alcoholic 

Steatohepatitis by Salvianolic Acid B.  Arch Med Res  48 , 506 -512 (2017). 

48.  Baar, M.P.  et al.  Targeted Apoptosis of Senescent Cells Restores Tissue Homeostasis in 

Response to Chemotoxicity and Aging.  Cell  169 , 132 -147.e116 (2017). 

49.  Salma, F., Yassire, O., Youssef, B., Corinne, D. & Ameziane El Hassani, R. Methods for detection 

of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species in senescent cells.  Methods Cell Biol  181 , 33 -41 

(2024). 

50.  Miwa, S., Kashyap, S., Chini, E. & von Zglinicki, T. Mitochondrial dysfunction in cell senescence 

and aging.  J Clin Invest  132  (2022). 

51.  Meric, N., Kar, E. & Kar, F. 4 -Methylthiazole triggers apoptosis and mitochondrial disruption in 

HL -60 cells.  Mol Biol Rep  51 , 997 (2024). 

52.  Zhao, L.  et al.  beta -Lapachone induces ferroptosis of colorectal cancer cells via NCOA4 -

mediated ferritinophagy by activating JNK pathway.  Chem Biol Interact  389 , 110866 (2024). 

53.  Peng, L.T.  et al.  Dihydromyricetin ameliorates neurotoxicity induced by high glucose through 

restraining ferroptosis by inhibiting JNK -inflammation pathway in HT22 cells.  Neuroscience  565 ,

40 -51 (2025). 

54.  Cho, S.S.  et al.  Ferroptosis contribute to hepatic stellate cell activation and liver fibrogenesis. 

Free Radic Biol Med  193 , 620 -637 (2022). 

55.  Khan, F.A.  et al.  c-Jun in neurodegeneration: A key transcriptional regulator with therapeutic 

implications.  Mol Ther Nucleic Acids  37 , 102874 (2026). 

56.  Flores, C.A. & Yang, W.S. Detection of Ferroptosis by Liperfluo and BODIPY 581/591 C11. 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 49

Methods in molecular biology  2983 , 135 -142 (2026). 

57.  Zhang, Y.  et al.  Mitochondria -associated programmed cell death in pancreatic beta cell of 

T2DM.  Apoptosis  31  (2026). 

58.  Li, J.  et al.  Adverse outcome pathway analysis identifies DRP1 -driven mitochondrial dysfunction 

as a central event in silver nanoparticle -induced hepatocyte ferroptosis.  Apoptosis  31  (2026). 

59.  Sun, Y.  et al.  SFRP2 augments WNT16B signaling to promote therapeutic resistance in the 

damaged tumor microenvironment.  Oncogene  35 , 4321 -4334 (2016). 

60.  Demaria, M.  et al.  Cellular Senescence Promotes Adverse Effects of Chemotherapy and Cancer 

Relapse.  Cancer discovery  7, 165 -176 (2017). 

61.  Melisi, D.  et al.  Modulation of pancreatic cancer chemoresistance by inhibition of TAK1.  Journal 

of the National Cancer Institute  103 , 1190 -1204 (2011). 

62.  Wissler Gerdes, E.O., Misra, A., Netto, J.M.E., Tchkonia, T. & Kirkland, J.L. Strategies for late 

phase preclinical and early clinical trials of senolytics.  Mech Ageing Dev  200 , 111591 (2021). 

63.  Qiu, L.L.  et al.  Dysregulation of BDNF/TrkB signaling mediated by NMDAR/Ca(2+)/calpain might 

contribute to postoperative cognitive dysfunction in aging mice.  J Neuroinflammation  17 , 23 

(2020). 

64.  Franco, A.C.  et al.  Senescent cell transplantation into the skin induces age -related peripheral 

dysfunction and cognitive decline.  Aging cell , e14340 (2024). 

65.  Xu, M.  et al.  Senolytics improve physical function and increase lifespan in old age.  Nat Med  24 ,

1246 -1256 (2018). 

66.  Qiu, J.M.  et al.  A novel salvianolic acid A analog with resveratrol structure and its antioxidant 

activities in vitro and in vivo.  Drug Develop Res  82 , 108 -114 (2021). 

67.  Zhou, R.  et al.  Salvianolic acid B, an antioxidant derived from Salvia militarize, protects mice 

against gamma ‑radiation ‑induced damage through Nrf2/Bach1.  Mol Med Rep  19 , 1309 -1317 

(2019). 

68.  Mbara, K.C., Devnarain, N. & Owira, P.M.O. Potential Role of Polyphenolic Flavonoids as 

Senotherapeutic Agents in Degenerative Diseases and Geroprotection.  Pharmaceutical 

Medicine  36 , 331 -352 (2022). 

69.  Zhu, Y.  et al.  Identification of a novel senolytic agent, navitoclax, targeting the Bcl -2 family of 

anti -apoptotic factors.  Aging cell  15 , 428 -435 (2016). 

70.  Rudin, C.M.  et al.  Phase II study of single -agent navitoclax (ABT -263) and biomarker correlates 

in patients with relapsed small cell lung cancer.  Clinical cancer research : an official journal of 

the American Association for Cancer Research  18 , 3163 -3169 (2012). 

71.  Proshkina, E.  et al.  Polyphenols as Potential Geroprotectors.  Antioxid Redox Signal  40 , 564 -593 

(2024). 

72.  Iqbal, I.  et al.  Plant Polyphenols and Their Potential Benefits on Cardiovascular Health: A Review. 

Molecules  28  (2023). 

73.  Leri, M.  et al.  Healthy Effects of Plant Polyphenols: Molecular Mechanisms.  Int J Mol Sci  21 

(2020). 

74.  Carver, C.M.  et al.  IL -23R is a senescence -linked circulating and tissue biomarker of aging.  Nat 

Aging  (2024). 

75.  Punziano, C., Trombetti, S., Cesaro, E., Grosso, M. & Faraonio, R. Antioxidant Systems as 

Modulators of Ferroptosis: Focus on Transcription Factors.  Antioxidants -Basel  13  (2024). 

76.  Pope, L.E. & Dixon, S.J. Regulation of ferroptosis by lipid metabolism.  Trends in cell biology  33 ,

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 50

1077 -1087 (2023). 

77.  Stockwell, B.R. Ferroptosis turns 10: Emerging mechanisms, physiological functions, and 

therapeutic applications.  Cell  185 , 2401 -2421 (2022). 

78.  D'Ambrosio, M.  et al.  Electrophilic compound screening identifies GPX4 -dependent ferroptosis 

as a senescence vulnerability.  Nat Cell Biol  (2026). 

79.  Jin, C.  et al.  Prodrug nanoplatform for triggering ferroptosis to eliminate senescent cells in age -

associated pathologies.  Nat Commun  17 , 630 (2025). 

80.  Uppugunduri, C.R.S., Muthukumaran, J., Robin, S., Santos -Silva, T. & Ansari, M. In silico and in 

vitro investigations on the protein -protein interactions of glutathione S -transferases with 

mitogen -activated protein kinase 8 and apoptosis signal -regulating  kinase 1.  J Biomol Struct 

Dyn  40 , 1430 -1440 (2022). 

81.  Fan, Y.  et al.  Novel Electrophilic Warhead Targeting a Triple -Negative Breast Cancer Driver in 

Live Cells Revealed by "Inverse Drug Discovery".  J Med Chem  64 , 15582 -15592 (2021). 

82.  Singh, R.R., Mohammad, J., Orr, M. & Reindl, K.M. Glutathione S -Transferase pi -1 Knockdown 

Reduces Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinoma Growth by Activating Oxidative Stress Response 

Pathways.  Cancers  12  (2020). 

83.  Zhu, Y.  et al.  Glutathione S -transferase -Pi 1 protects cells from irradiation -induced death by 

inhibiting ferroptosis in pancreatic cancer.  Faseb J  38 , e70033 (2024). 

84.  Gupta, S. The p21 resilience network: a conceptual framework linking senescence to 

ferroptosis and cuproptosis resistance.  NPJ Syst Biol Appl  (2026). 

85.  Spiegel, M. Fisetin as a Blueprint for Senotherapeutic Agents  - Elucidating Geroprotective and 

Senolytic Properties with Molecular Modeling.  Chemistry , e202403755 (2024). 

86.  Liu, L.  et al.  Vitamin C inhibits ACSL4 to alleviate ferro -aging in primates.  Cell Metab  (2026). 

87.  Sun, Y., Li, Q. & Kirkland, J.K. Targeting Senescent Cells for a Healthier Longevity: the Roadmap 

for an Era of Global Aging.  Life Med  1, 103 -119 (2022). 

88.  Garmany, A. & Terzic, A. Global Healthspan -Lifespan Gaps Among 183 World Health 

Organization Member States.  JAMA Netw Open  7, e2450241 (2024). 

89.  Ma, H.  et al.  Macrophages inhibit adipogenic differentiation of adipose tissue derived 

mesenchymal stem/stromal cells by producing pro -inflammatory cytokines.  Cell Biosci  10 , 88 

(2020). 

90.  Zerbino, D.R., Wilder, S.P., Johnson, N., Juettemann, T. & Flicek, P.R. The ensembl regulatory 

build.  Genome biology  16 , 56 (2015). 

91.  Trapnell, C.  et al.  Differential gene and transcript expression analysis of RNA -seq experiments 

with TopHat and Cufflinks.  Nat Protoc  7, 562 -578 (2012). 

92.  Nix, D.A., Courdy, S.J. & Boucher, K.M. Empirical methods for controlling false positives and 

estimating confidence in ChIP -Seq peaks.  BMC Bioinformatics  9, 523 (2008). 

93.  Zhou, W.J.  et al.  Fructose -1,6 -bisphosphate prevents pregnancy loss by inducing decidual COX -

2(+) macrophage differentiation.  Sci Adv  8, eabj2488 (2022). 

94.  Chen, X.  et al.  Celastrol induces ROS -mediated apoptosis via directly targeting peroxiredoxin -2

in gastric cancer cells.  Theranostics  10 , 10290 -10308 (2020). 

95.  Kalathiya, U., Padariya, M. & Baginski, M. Structural, functional, and stability change 

predictions in human telomerase upon specific point mutations.  Scientific reports  9, 8707 

(2019). 

96.  Chen, F.  et al.  Targeting SPINK1 in the damaged tumour microenvironment alleviates 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 51

therapeutic resistance.  Nat Commun  9, 4315 (2018). 

97.  Hughes, R.N. The value of spontaneous alternation behavior (SAB) as a test of retention in 

pharmacological investigations of memory.  Neurosci Biobehav Rev  28 , 497 -505 (2004). 

98.  Ibi, D.  et al.  Antipsychotic -induced Hdac2 transcription via NF -kappaB leads to synaptic and 

cognitive side effects.  Nat Neurosci  20 , 1247 -1259 (2017). 

99.  Chen, T.  et al.  iProX in 2021: connecting proteomics data sharing with big data.  Nucleic Acids 

Res  50 , D1522 -D1527 (2022). 

Acknowledgements 

We are grateful to the members of Sun laboratory for reagents, comments and other 

contributions. Th is  study  was s upported by  grants from the Strategic Priority 

Research Program of Chinese Academy of Sciences ( XDB39010500  to Y.S.); 

National Key Research and Development Program of China ( 2020YFC2002800  to 

Y.S. ),  National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC)  (82130045, 

82350710221  and  82571777  to Y.S.);  Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology 

Commission Excellent Academic Leader Program ( 20XD1404300  to  Y.S. ); Taishan 

Scholar Project of Shandong Province (tstp20230634 Y.S.);  Natural Science 

Foundation of Shandong Province  Joint Fund Program (ZR202108130049, 

ZR2021LSW021  to Y.S. ); the Connor Fund, Robert and Theresa Ryan, and th e

Noaber Foundation (to J.L.K.); Key R&D Program of Shandong Province 

(2023CXPT012 to G.Z.); the National Natural Science Foundation of China 

(22007006 to G.Z.); Taishan Scholar Project of Shandong Province (tsqn201909144 

to G.Z.);  Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality 

(22MC1940300 to Q.L.); Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province 

(ZR2023MH262 to Q.F.)  and T ranslational Medicine Association of Shandong 

Province (ZHA2025021  to Q.F. ). 

Author contributions 

Y.S. conceived this study, designed the experiments and orchestrated the project. 

Z. J.  and H.Z.  performed most of the  in vitro  assays and some  of the  in vivo 

experiments and wrote part of the manuscript. Q.X. and  W.H.  helped with cell culture, 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 52

drug treatment  and  sample preparation . S.Z. assisted in cell culture and 

maintenance.  H.Z. conducted  proteomic profiling of human senescent cells.  Q.F. 

ass ayed  SASP  expression  in vivo  and analyzed  serum  of animals . Q.L., G.Z.  and 

J.L.K. provided constructive advice and/or  supervised a specific subset of 

experiments.  Y.S.  performed data analysis, graphic al  presentation and finalized the 

manuscript. All authors critically read and commented on the final manuscript. 

Competing interests 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

Additional information 

Extended data  is available for this paper at designated link. 

Supplementary information.  The online version contains supplementary material 

available at the designated link. 

Correspondence and requests for materials  should be addressed to Yu Sun. 

Figure legends 

Fig. 1 Workflow for  in vitro  screening of a  NMA library to  identify  potential 

senotherapeutic  candidates.  (a) Schematic representation of the technical 

procedure for human cell model -based screening of a  NMA library  comprising  55 

natural ly  derived agents. Screening was preliminarily performed for all natural 

products to evaluate their individual senotherapeutic activity, with  the  efficacy of 

potential candidates  further validated in human stromal cell lines including PSC27, 

WI38, HUVEC s and ADSC s. ( b) Senolytic screening outputs after drug treatments 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 53

in culture. Natural compounds were examined by incubation for 3 days at a 

concentration of 3  μg/ml /agent  (PCC1 at 50  μM) with 5.0 ⅹ10 3 cells. Each blue dot 

indicates a hit based on effect iveness in  selectively kill ing  SEN  (TIS)  but not CTRL 

stromal cells , and represents the mean of 3 biological replicates. The green -edged 

rectangular region shows  the resulting output of  senolytic candidate screening . Note, 

the positive control, PCC1 (red dot), fell in this region.  (c) A representative  botanical 

image of  Salvia miltiorrhiza  and chemical structures of 3  senolytic  Salvianolic acid 

molecules , namely  SAA, SAB and SAE. Image source of  Salvia miltiorrhiza ,

Pixabay .com (n o permission or acknowledgement required ). (d,e) Appraisal of the 

efficacy of natural agents as potential senolytics in SEN and their CTRL counterparts. 

(d), group part I. ( e), group part II. NMA,  natural medicinal agent.  CTRL, control. 

SEN, senescent. TIS, therapy -induced senescence. PCC1, procyanidin C1. Data in 

b, d and  e are shown as mean  ± SD and representative of 3 independent biological 

replicates.  P values were calculated by Student’s  t-tests. ^,  P > 0.05; * , P < 0.05; **, 

P < 0.01. 

Fig. 2  Characterization of the senolytic  potential of SAA . (a) Measurement of 

senescent PSC27 survival by SA -β-gal staining. SAA was applied at increasing 

concentrations as indicated. CTRL, control. SEN, senescent. ( b) Representative 

images from SA -β-gal staining assays to profile  survival of cells including CTRL cells 

and their SEN counterparts induced by BLEO and treated  with  increasing 

concentrations of SAA. Scale bar, 50  μm . (c) Cell counting -based survival assay of 

CTRL and SEN cells exposed to increasing concentrations of SAA. ( d) Cell 

apoptosis by caspase 3/7 activity measurement.  SAA , 200  μM. (e) Cell  viability in a 

time course to assess  in vitro  survival after SAA treatment  (200  μM).  (f)

Representative images from SA -β-gal staining. TIS, therapy -induced senescence 

(by BLEO). RS, replicative senescence (by passive passaging). OIS, oncogene -

induced senescence (by oncogenic  HRas G12V ). Scale bar, 50  μm . (g) Comparative 

statistics  for  SA -β-gal staining positivity as described in ( f). ( h) FACS sorting with an 

annexin  V-FITC/PI  staining to  assay  cell  apoptosis . ( i) Quantitative profiling of 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 54

individual percentages of viable (Q4: PI −/annexin V −) and apoptotic (Q2 and Q3: 

PI +/annexin V + and PI −/annexin V +, respectively) cells after treatment with vehicle or 

SAA for 3 days. ( j) Survival analysis of CTRL and SEN cells after exposure to 

various agents targeting apoptosis,  pyroptosis, necroptosis and  ferroptosis. QVD, 

VX -765, Nec -1s and LIP are chemical inhibitors  of  apoptosis,  pyroptosis, 

necroptosis and  ferroptosis , respectively.  QVD,  QVD -Oph.  VX -765,  Belnacasan. 

Nec -1s,  Nec rostatin 2 racemate.  LIP,  lipoxstatin -1. Data in  a, c, d, e, g, i and  j are 

shown as mean  ± SD and representative of 3 independent biological replicates with 

P values calculated by Student’s  t-tests. ^,  P > 0.05; * , P < 0.05; **,  P < 0.01; ***, 

P < 0.001; ****,  P < 0.0001. 

Fig. 3 SAA  induces senescent cell apoptosis by engaging pro -apoptotic 

pathways.  (a) Chemical structure of SAA ( CAS no. 96574 -01 -5). ( b) Heatmap 

depicting top genes (50, by fold change) significantly upregulated in senescent 

PSC27 cells but downregulated  by  SAA treatment (50 μM). Red stars, SASP factors. 

(c) GSEA plot analysis of a significant gene set of the SASP spectrum upon 

treatment by BLEO  vs.  BLEO/SAA.  (d) GSEA plot assessment of a significant gene 

set associated with NF -κB -mediated signaling upon treatment by BLEO  vs. 

BLEO/SAA. ( e) NetworkAnalyst map profiling protein -protein interactions of SASP -

associated factors significantly upre gulated in senescent cells but downregulated by 

SAA.  (f) Immunoblots of  PSC27 cells treated under different conditions involving 

BLEO and/or SAA. Expression of DDR signaling molecules, SASP regulatory 

factors,  and  pro -apoptotic and anti -apoptotic proteins was examined. Caspase 3 (t), 

total caspase 3; caspase 3 (c), cleaved caspase 3; p, phosphorylated.  β-actin and 

GAPDH, loading control s. (g) Immunoblots of  PSC27 cells exposed to different 

conditions involving BLEO and/or SAB. Examination of target molecules as 

described in ( f) was performed.  (h) Immunoblots of  PSC27 cells exposed to different 

conditions involving BLEO and/or SAE. Examination of target molecules as 

described in (f) was conducted. Data are representat ive of 3 independent 

experiments.  ^,  P > 0.05; * , P < 0.05; **,  P < 0.01; ***,  P < 0.001 .

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 55

Fig. 4 Proteomics profiling reveals potential factor(s) mediating the senolytic 

actions of SA compounds in senescent cells.  (a) Venn diagram outlining the 

shared potential targets (46) of SAA, SAB and SAE identified by 20K HuProt TM 

human protein microarrays as being significant ( P < 0.05).  (b) GO profiling of the 46 

co -targets of SA compounds (SAA, SAB and SAE) identified by protein microarrays 

as significant.  (c) A schematic illustration of technical procedure for  protein 

microarray analysis  (upper) and  affinity -based MS that applied a SAA -Bio probe for 

target enrichment, followed by pulldown assays mediated by Cy5 -Streptavidin -

agarose  (lower) . Both  strateg ies  enable discovery of target(s) of  a chemical  using 

protein lysates from senescent cells.  (d) Venn diagram depicting the potential co -

targe ts (436) of SA compounds disclosed by  pulldown assays . ( e) Venn diagram 

depicting the potential  co -targets (7) of SA compounds  identified by both protein 

microarrays and pulldown assays. ( f-g) A full list of the 7 co -targeted proteins of SA 

compounds as revealed in ( e), after probing by protein microarrays ( f) and  pulldown 

assays ( g). Note, GSTP1 (red highlighted) was inferred to be the major co -target of 

the 3 SA compounds.  (h) CETSA assay evaluation of the thermal stabilization of 

GSTP1  by  incubation with SA compounds  over  a gradient of temperatures from 25 

to 50 °C  in  protein lysates of PSC27 cells.  (i-k) Demonstration that SA compounds 

physically bind to GSTP1. In  the  SPR assay, GSTP1 was treated by each of the SA 

compounds ( i, SAA;  j, SAB;  k, SAE) over a range of concentrations as indicated in 

the individual plots. Kinetically derived binding affinity  (KD) values are shown beside 

the traces.  (l) M olecular docking that illustrates amino acid residues Cys10 1 and 

others (such as Asp98)  of GSTP1 b ind  to SAA  and  SAB  (S= -6.817 kcal/mol; S= -

8.304 kcal/mol) , or alternatively, amino acid residues Cys47 and  others (such as 

Ala1 72) of GSTP1 b ind  to SAE  (S= -6.762 kcal/mol) . Reported X -ray diffraction 

microscopy structure (PDB ID: 2A2R) was applied to perform molecular docking, 

with the key amino acid residues highlighted in structure.  MS, mass  spectrometry .

^,  P > 0.05; * , P < 0.05; **,  P < 0.01 .

Fig. 5 SA compounds eliminate senescent cells by enhancing intracellular 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 56

ROS production and disturbing mitochondrial membrane potential.  (a)

Representative images  during  measurement of ROS production with 2′,7′ 

dichlorofluorescein diacetate (DCFH -DA), a cell -permeable fluorescent probe that 

labels  intracellular ROS molecules . Experiments were performed 1 d after treatment 

with each of the SA compounds. DCF, dichlorodihydrofluorescein. Scale bar, 20  μm. 

(b) Comparative statistics of the relative signal intensity  per  treatment group as 

described in  a. ( c) Immunoblot analysis of cytoplasmic and nuclear lysates of 

PSC27 cells treated under different conditions involving BLEO and/or SAA. GAPDH 

and Lamin A/C, loading controls for cytoplasmic and nuclear samples, respectively. 

(d) Fluorescence signal measurement of MitoSOX Red, a mitochondrial superoxide 

indicator, in PSC27 cells under different conditions. ( e) Representative images from 

assessment of mitochondria l membrane potential (Δψ m) by staining with a

fluorescent dye JC -1. Signals were measured over 3 d. Green fluorescence 

indicates JC -1 monomers, which appear in cytosol after mitochondrial membrane 

depolarization and indicate early -stage apoptosis. Red fluo rescence indicates JC -1

aggregates, which reside on intact mitochondria. Scale bar, 20  μm. ( f) Comparative 

statistics of the relative signal intensity  per  treatment group  as described in  e. SAA 

(left), SAB (middle) and SAE (right) were employed at 100  μM,  100  μM and 50  μM

in relevant assays, respectively. ( g) Immunoblot analysis of mitochondrial and 

cytoplasmic lysates of PSC27 cells treated under different conditions involving 

BLEO and/or SAA. GAPDH and COX IV, loading controls for cytoplasmic and 

mitochondrial samples, respectively. Data in  b, d and  f are shown as mean  ± SD 

and representative of 3 independent biological replicates, with  P values calculated 

by Student’s  t-tests. ^,  P > 0.05; *,  P < 0.05; **,  P < 0.01; ***,  P < 0.001; ****, 

P < 0.0001. 

Fig. 6 Senolysis by SA compounds re duce s cancer resistance acquired from 

the treatment -damaged tumor microenvironment.  (a) A schematic workflow 

illustrating the preclinical therapeutic procedure. Two weeks after subcutaneous 

inoculation and  in vivo  uptake of PC3/PSC27 recombinants, severe combined 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 57

immunodeficient ( M-NSG ) mice were subject to either single agent or combinatorial 

treatment in a metronomic schedule of several cycles.  The illustration was created 

in BioRender.  (b) Comparative statistics of tumor end volumes. PC3 cancer cells 

were inoculated either alone or combined with PSC27 stromal cells before  being 

implanted subcutaneously to the hind flank of  M-NSG  animals, which were 

administered with MIT and SAA, either alone or in combination. ( c) Representative 

images of  in vivo  senescence in tumor foci by SA -β-gal staining. Scale bar, 50  μm. 

(d) Comparative statistics of tumor senescence as described in (c). (e)

Transcriptional analysis of a subset of SASP factors expressed in epithelial  vs. 

stromal cells acquired from tumor foci after laser capture microdissection (LCM) to 

isolate stromal and cancer cells, respectively. Signals were normalized to that of the 

sample with lowest value in  the  placebo group. ( f) Transcriptional analysis of SASP 

factors and two canonical senescence biomarkers p16 INK4a  and p21 CIP1 . (g)

Statistical assessment of DDR and cellular apoptosis in tumors. Values are shown 

as the percentage o f cells positively stained by IF or IHC specific to  γH2AX or 

cleaved caspase 3 (CCL3), respectively. ( h) Representative images of  IHC staining 

for CCL3 at the completion of treatment regimens.  Scale bar, 50  μm. ( i) Comparative 

survival of animals sacri fi ced upon development of advanced bulky disease. 

Survival duration was calculated from tissue recombinant injection until death.  P

values were calculated by a two -sided log -rank (Mantel -Cox) test.  DDR, DNA 

damage response. IF, immunofluorescence. IHC, immunohistochemistry. Data in  b,

d, e, f and  g are shown as mean  ± SD and representative of 3 independent biological 

replicates, with  P values calculated by Student’s  t-tests. ^,  P > 0.05; * , P < 0.05; **, 

P < 0.01; ***,  P < 0.001; ****,  P < 0.0001. 

Fig. 7 SAA treatment alleviates physical dysfunction  in  animals exposed to 

WBI to induce premature aging.  (a) Schematic presentation of experimental 

procedure for m ice  experiencing whole body irradiation (WBI) and physical function 

tests.  The illustration was created in BioRender.  (b) Whole body snapshoot 

comparison of  C57BL/6J males that were naï ve, WBI -exposed followed by vehicle -

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 58

treatment and WBI -exposed followed by PCC1 -treatment, respectively. (c)

Representative images of SA -β-gal staining of cardiac tissues of untreated (naive) 

and WBI -exposed  mice subject to vehicle or PCC1 treatment. Scale bar, 200  μm. 

(d) Representative images of SA -β-gal staining of pulmonary tissues of mice as 

described in ( c). Scale bar, 200  μm. ( e) Representative images of SA -β-gal staining 

of  cortical  tissues of untreated (naive) and WBI -exposed  mice subject ed  to vehicle 

or PCC1 treatment. Scale bar, 200  μm. ( f) Comparative statistics of SA -β-gal 

staining positivity of cardiac (left), pulmonary (middle) and  cortical  (right) tissues of 

animals examined in ( c), ( d) and ( e), respectively. ( g) Measurement of running 

distance on treadmill (left) and grip strength (right)  in  experimental mice. ( h) Mouse 

Y-maze test. Left, an illustrative model. Middle, comparative total arms. Right, 

comparative alterations.  (i) Comparative s urvival of in naï ve, WBI followed by 

treatment with either vehicle or SAA.  P values were calculated by a two -sided log -

rank (Mantel -Cox) test.  Data in  f-h are shown as mean  ± SD and representative of 

3 independent biological replicates, with  P values calculated by Student’s  t-tests. ^, 

P > 0.05; * , P < 0.05; **,  P < 0.01; ***,  P < 0.001; ****,  P < 0.0001. 

Fig. 8 Intermittent  SAA administration improves physical function and 

increases lifespan of naturally aged mice.  (a) Schematic illustration of a

preclinical procedure for 20 -month -old C57BL/6J animals treated with SAA (SAB or 

SAE) once every 2 weeks (biweekly) for 4 months. After completion of the regimen, 

mice underwent physical function testing . PCC1 was administered as a natural 

senolytic control.  The illustration was created in BioRender.  (b) Representative 

images of SA -β-gal staining of lung tissues from young and aged mi ce treated with 

vehicle SAA. Scale bar, 100  μm. As a positive control for senolytics, PCC1 was 

administered in parallel.  (c) Comparative statistics of SA -β-gal staining positivity in 

lung tissues of mice.  (d-h)  Quantification of maximal walking speed (relative to 

baseline) ( d), hanging endurance ( e), treadmill endurance ( f), grip strength ( g) and 

daily activity ( h) of 20 -month -old  C57BL/6J  males after  a 4-month intervention with 

SAA. ( i) Quantification of the time to cross  a balance beam. Data before and after 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint 59

treatment of each animal were connected to allow direct comparison of treatment s.

(j) Quantitative transcript profiling of SASP expression in lung tissues collected from 

6-month -old untreated (6M), 24 -month -old vehicle -treated (24M -Vehicle) and 24 -

month -old SAA -treated mice (24M -SAA). The 24 -month -old PCC1 -treated mice 

(24M -PCC1) served as  positive control.  Data are shown as mean ± SD and derive 

from 3 biological replicates ( n = 3 independent assays) . (k) Schematic presentation 

of lifespan analysis of mice at 24 -to -27 months of age.  The illustration was created 

in BioRender.  (l-m) Post -treatment survival ( l) and whole -life survival ( m) curves of 

C57BL/6J  animals treated biweekly with SAA ( n = 38 ; 20 males, 18 females) or 

vehicle ( n = 39 ; 20 males, 19 females) starting at 24 -27 months of age. In each case, 

PCC1 was administered as a positive control ( n = 32 ; 16 males, 16 females). ( n)

Maximal walking speed and hanging endurance averaged over the last 2 months of 

life ( n = 10/group ), and lifespan for the longest living mice (top 20) in both groups. 

(o) Disease burden and tumor burden  at death of mice. In the case of disease 

burden, for both sexes,  n (animal number ) = 30  per  arm. For males ( ♂), n = 15  for 

V,  n = 16 for SAA,  n = 14 for PCC1. For females ( ♀), n = 15 for V,  n = 14 for SAA, 

n = 16 for PCC1.  (p) Schematic representation of key findings related with senolysis 

induced by SA compounds.  Senescent cells exhibit inherent resistance to apoptosis 

and ferroptosis, a property that is mediated by the SCAP network involving bioactive 

molecules such as GSTP1. Mechanistically, SA compounds can target GSTP1 and 

enhance programmed death of senescent  cells by activating  a dual death modality 

characterized by both  apoptotic and ferroptotic responses, potentiating their 

geroprotective role in counteracting natural ag ing and preventing age -related 

dysfunctions. SCAP,  senescent  cell  anti -apoptotic pathway.  For  c-h, j, n = 3 

biologically independent assays.  Data  in  d-h are displayed as box -and -whisker plots, 

where a box extends from the 25th to 75th percentile with the median shown as a 

line in the middle,  and  whiskers indicating smallest and largest values ( d-h, n), or 

as mean  ± SD ( o).  Unpaired two -tailed Student’s  t-tests ( c-j, n, o) and Cox 

proportional hazard regression model ( l, m).  ^,  P > 0.05; * , P < 0.05; **,  P < 0.01; ***, 

P < 0.001; ****,  P < 0.0001. 

> reuse, remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors. preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, The copyright holder has placed this this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.29.721790 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Fig. 1 

# a

# c

# b

# d

# eFig. 2 

# a

# c

# b

# ed

# gf

# h

# i

# jFig. 3 

# a b

# c

# d

# e f

# g hFig. 4 

# a b

# c

# d

# f

# e

# g l

## ji k

# hFig. 5 

# b d

# e

## a

# f

# c

# gFig. 6 

# a b

# g

# h

# c d

# e

# f

# iFig. 7 

# a

# b c

# d e

# f g

# h iFig. 8 

# a b

# g hc d e f

# k

# l m

# n o

# i j