Title: 62885767

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921v2.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 55

Markdown Content:
Closed-Loop Connectivity Best Supports Angular Tuning and 

# Sleep Dynamics in a Biophysical Thalamocortical Circuit Model 

Short title: Thalamocortical circuits form closed-loops: a computational study 

Joao  VS  Moreira 1* , Fernando  S Borges 1, Zoe  Atherton 2, Shane  R Crandall 3, Carmen  Varela 2, Salvador 

Dura-Bernal 1,4*  

> 1

Department  of  Physiology  and  Pharmacology,  State  University  of  New  York  - Downstate  Health  Sciences 

University, Brooklyn, NY 11203, USA  

> 2

Department of Psychology, Florida State University,  Tallahassee, FL 32306, USA  

> 3

Department of Physiology, Michigan State University,  East Lansing, MI 48824, USA  

> 4

Center  for  Biomedical  Imaging  and  Neuromodulation,  Nathan  S.  Kline  Institute  for  Psychiatric  Research, 

Orangeburg, NY 10962, USA 

> *

Corresponding authors 

E-mail:  jmoreira.research@gmail.com  (JM),  salvador.dura-bernal@downstate.edu  (SD) 

1

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint Abstract 

Despite  recent  advancements  in  mapping  thalamic  and  cortical  projections,  the  specific  organization  of 

intrathalamic  and  corticothalamic  connectivity  remains  elusive.  Current  experimental  approaches  cannot 

definitively  determine  whether  these  connections  are  arranged  in  reciprocal  (closed-)  or  non-reciprocal 

(open-loop)  circuits.  We  developed  a biophysically  detailed  multi-compartmental  model  of  the  mouse 

whisker  pathway,  built  on  anatomical  and  physiological  data.  We  showed  that  closed-loop  intrathalamic 

projections  between  the  thalamocortical  (TC)  relay  neurons  in  the  ventral  posteromedial  nucleus  and  the 

inhibitory  neurons  in  the  thalamic  reticular  nucleus  (TRN)  best  reproduce  thalamic  spiking  and  local  field 

potential  responses  across  awake  and  sleep  states.  Increasing  the  percentage  of  closed-loop  projections 

regulates  the  angular  tuning  in  the  awake  state,  while  also  supporting  spindle  oscillations  during  sleep.  We 

also  showed  that  direct  activation  of  closed-loop  corticothalamic  feedback  (CT→TC  and  CT→TRN), 

simulating  TC  inputs,  sharpens  the  angular  tuning  in  the  thalamus.  These  results  contribute  to  resolving  a

long-standing  question  regarding  the  organization  of  intrathalamic  projections,  offering  insights  into  how 

thalamo-cortical  circuits  balance  precise  sensory  tuning  with  robust  oscillatory  rhythms  across  behavioral 

states.  Moreover,  all  model  resources  are  open-source  and  available  to  other  researchers  interested  in 

studying thalamocortical circuits. 

# Author summary 

A long  standing  question  in  the  study  of  thalamocortical  interactions  is  whether  neurons  in  the  thalamus 

form  so-called  open- or  closed-loops  when  they  project  within  the  thalamus  and  to  the  cortex.  In  this  study, 

we  used  a detailed  computational  model  of  the  thalamic  neurons  in  the  whisker  pathway  of  the  mouse  with 

realistic  biophysics  to  investigate  this  question.  We  evaluated  the  impact  of  different  connectivity 

arrangements  in  reproducing  the  activity  of  thalamic  neurons  observed  during  wakefulness  and  sleep.  Our 

results  show  that  a closed-loop  circuit  arrangement  provides  the  best  alternative  to  reproduce  wake  and 

sleep  neuronal  responses,  highlighting  the  importance  of  computational  modeling  as  a tool  to  disentangle 

thalamic  circuit  organization.  We  also  showed  that  closed-loop  projections  from  the  cortex  to  the  thalamus 

help  further  amplify  the  selectivity  of  thalamic  neurons,  suggesting  a similar  organization  of  corticothalamic 

projections.  We  hope  our  predictions  can  inform  future  experiments,  and  elucidate  principles  of 

2

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

thalamocortical  connectivity  that  can  be  generalized  across  other  thalamocortical  motifs  besides  the 

whisker pathway and across species. 

3

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint Introduction 

Understanding  thalamo-cortical  interactions  is  essential  for  deciphering  brain  function  across  wake  and 

sleep  states.  During  wakefulness,  these  interactions  support  a range  of  functions,  including  sensory  relay 

[1,2] , attentional  modulation  [3,4] , and  motor  coordination  [5] . During  sleep,  they  give  rise  to  slow 

oscillations  and  rhythmic  activity  such  as  spindles  [6] , particularly  during  stage  N2  of  non-rapid  eye 

movement  (NREM)  sleep  [7–9] . Sleep  spindles  play  an  essential  role  in  processes  like  memory 

consolidation  [10,11]  and  synaptic  plasticity  [12,13] , highlighting  the  central  role  of  thalamo-cortical  circuits 

in both cognitive and physiological functions. 

Despite  advances  in  mapping  thalamo-cortical  projections  [14–18] , the  architecture  of  intrathalamic 

connectivity,  particularly  between  the  excitatory  thalamocortical  (TC)  neurons  and  the  inhibitory  neurons  in 

the  thalamic  reticular  nucleus  (TRN),  remains  unclear.  Current  experimental  methods  cannot  definitively 

resolve  whether  TC  neurons  receive  direct  feedback  from  the  same  TRN  neurons  that  they  innervate, 

forming  reciprocal  (closed-loop)  circuits,  or  whether  TRN  feedback  targets  neighboring  TC  neurons,  in  a

non-reciprocal  (open-loop)  fashion  [19] . Clarifying  this  distinction  is  key  to  understanding  how  the  thalamus 

switches between precise sensory relay during wakefulness and robust oscillatory rhythms during sleep. 

The  rodent  whisker  pathway  provides  an  ideal  system  to  investigate  this  question  due  to  its 

well-defined  somatotopic  organization  [20] . Each  whisker  is  represented  by  distinct  and  clearly  defined 

groups  of  cells  from  the  brainstem  to  the  cortex  [21,22] , which  preserve  a preference  for  projecting  within 

this  pathway,  including  the  brainstem,  thalamus,  and  cortex  [23,24] . The  ventral  posteromedial  nucleus 

(VPM)  is  the  core  whisker  division  of  the  somatosensory  thalamus  and  is  organized  into  somatotopic  units 

known  as  barreloids . These  barreloids  receive  excitatory  whisker-related  input  from  the  principal  trigeminal 

nucleus  in  the  brainstem,  which  is  also  somatotopically  arranged  into  corresponding  units  called  barrelettes 

[23,25] . The  receptive  field  of  an  individual  TC  neuron  is  dominated  by  a single  “principal”  whisker  that 

evokes  the  strongest  response.  TC  neurons  are  excitatory  and  send  axonal  projections  to  the  inhibitory 

TRN and its corresponding  barrel  in layer 4 of primary  somatosensory cortex (S1)  [22,26] .

Another  key  feature  of  the  whisker  pathway  is  the  topological  organization  of  its  axonal  projections, 

encoding  whisker  deflection  direction  selectivity  as  a linear  map  along  the  longitudinal  axis  of  the  thalamic 

barreloid  [27] . This  organization  arises  from  brainstem  axons  that  selectively  innervate  small  clusters  of 

neighboring  TC  neurons,  effectively  transferring  the  angular  tuning  from  brainstem  barrelettes  to  thalamic 

4

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

barreloids  [28] . As  a result,  directional  tuning  is  preserved  and  observable  across  the  brainstem  [1,2] ,

thalamus  [1,2,27] , and cortex  [29–31] .

In  addition,  the  intrinsic  biophysics  of  TC  and  TRN  neurons  shift  markedly  between  wakefulness  and 

sleep.  In  the  awake  state,  thalamic  neurons  remain  relatively  depolarized  and  fire  in  tonic  mode,  driven  by 

Na ⁺ and  K⁺ currents  [32] . In  contrast,  during  NREM  sleep,  membrane  hyperpolarization  de-inactivates 

T-type  Ca² ⁺ channels  [33–35] , enabling  low-threshold  calcium  spikes  [36,37]  and  burst  firing,  which  are  brief 

and  high-frequency  spike  clusters  [32] . This  sleep-induced  hyperpolarization  is  driven  by  changes  in 

neuromodulatory  inputs,  such  as  acetylcholine  and  norepinephrine  [38,39] , that  alter  ionic  conductances, 

particularly  in  K⁺ channels  [40] . The  transition  from  wake  to  sleep  is  also  marked  by  changes  in  synaptic 

strength,  driven  by  shifts  in  neurotransmitter  concentrations,  including  a two-fold  increase  in  extracellular 

GABA  [9,41,42] .

The  neurons  in  the  thalamus  are  also  influenced  by  excitatory  feedback  from  the  cortex.  TC  and  TRN 

neurons  receive  projections  from  corticothalamic  (CT)  neurons  in  layer  6A  (L6A)  of  S1  [43] , exerting  a

rate-dependent  modulation  in  the  thalamus  [44] . During  wakefulness,  CT  neurons  in  L6A  can  be  directly 

activated  by  TC  projections  [45–47] , enabling  a direct  feedback  mechanism  to  TC  inputs.  During  sleep, 

these  thalamo-cortical  interactions  are  replaced  by  oscillatory  activity,  such  as  “Up/Down”  states.  These 

Up/Down  states  occur  during  the  N2  stage  of  NREM  sleep  [48–50]  and  are  responsible  for  entraining 

spindle activity in the thalamus, which are 8–16 Hz waxing-waning oscillations lasting 500–3000 ms  [48,51] .

With  this  in  mind,  we  developed  a biophysically  detailed,  multi-compartmental  model  of  the 

thalamo-cortical  circuit  in  the  whisker  pathway,  inspired  by  a model  of  the  non-barreloid  thalamus  [52] , to 

investigate  how  intrathalamic  connectivity  shapes  thalamic  function  during  wakefulness  and  sleep.  Our 

open-source  model  incorporates  realistic  neuronal  morphologies,  short-term  synaptic  dynamics,  and 

anatomically  derived  topological  connectivity.  By  systematically  varying  the  connectivity  between  TC  and 

TRN  neurons,  we  show  that  closed-loop  connectivity  between  TC  and  TRN  neurons  provides  the  best 

configuration  to  reproduce  key  experimental  observations:  precise  angular  tuning  during  wakefulness  and 

robust  spindle  oscillations  during  sleep.  Additionally,  we  show  that  closed-loop  CT  feedback  further 

enhances  angular  tuning,  highlighting  the  role  of  closed-loop  projections  in  modulating  afferent  sensory 

inputs. 

These  findings  help  resolve  a long-standing  debate  over  the  synaptic  architecture  of  intrathalamic 

circuits.  Moreover,  it  provides  a framework  for  understanding  how  thalamo-cortical  circuits  balance  sensory 

5

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

precision  and  oscillatory  rhythms  across  behavioral  states,  which  are  principles  that  may  extend  to  other 

sensory modalities and cortical areas. 

# Results 

In  this  work,  we  developed  a biophysically  detailed  circuit  model  of  the  thalamo-cortical  whisker  pathway, 

integrating  multi-compartmental  morphological  reconstructions,  biophysical  membrane  properties,  synaptic 

short-term  dynamics,  gap  junction  coupling,  and  topological  connectivity  derived  from  anatomical  and 

physiological  data  (Fig  1).  The  model  reproduces  key  features  of  the  whisker  pathway  in  both  awake  and 

sleep  states,  at  the  level  of  neuronal  membrane  voltages,  firing  rates,  and  local  field  potentials  (Fig  2).  The 

model  also  includes  an  algorithm  to  generate  realistic  brainstem  inputs  encoding  whisker  deflections  (Fig 

3),  enabling  the  reproduction  of  thalamic  angular  tuning  response  during  wakefulness  (Figs  4 and  5).  In 

addition,  the  model  also  reproduces  thalamic  spindle  oscillations  during  sleep  in  response  to  CT  Up/Down 

modulation ( Fig 6 ). 

We  leveraged  these  features  to  investigate  the  organization  of  intrathalamic  connections  (Figs  5 and 

6) and  the  influence  of  direct  corticothalamic  activation  on  angular  tuning  (Fig  7).  This  open-source  model 

represents  a significant  step  forward  in  studying  thalamo-cortical  dynamics,  offering  a robust  platform  to 

investigate  how  structural  changes  in  thalamic  circuitry  impact  sensory  processing.  In  the  following 

sections,  we  explore  in  detail  how  thalamic  dynamics  and  function,  such  as  angular  tuning,  sleep 

oscillations,  and  corticothalamic  modulation,  are  related  to  thalamic  circuit  connectivity  and  what  the 

implications are for encoding sensory information. 

6

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig 1. Architecture of the model of the mouse thalamo-cortical whisker pathway. 

(A)  Schematic  representation  of  the  mouse  whisker  pathway.  (B)  Illustration  of  the  thalamic  nuclei  modeled 

(TC  neurons  in  a VPM  barreloid  and  corresponding  TRN  region),  spatial  arrangement  of  neurons,  and 

detailed  morphological  reconstructions  of  TC  and  TRN  neurons.  The  model  consists  of  1,560  neurons  with 

approximately  690k  synapses  across  95k  cell-to-cell  connections,  of  which  3.4k  are  gap  junctions  between 

TRN  neurons.  (C)  Morphological  templates  and  biophysical  properties  of  modeled  neurons,  adapted  from  a

computational  model  of  the  mouse  non-barreloid  thalamus  and  adjusted  based  on  experimental  data.  (D) 

7

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Properties  and  classification  of  chemical  synapses,  including  pathway-specific  short-term  plasticity 

dynamics  reflecting  driver  and  modulator  characteristics.  Postsynaptic  TC  and  TRN  neurons  were 

stimulated  using  the  parameters  of  the  6 different  synaptic  models  corresponding  to  each  connection  type 

shown  in  (B)  [52] . The  protocol  consisted  of  8 post-synaptic  potential  (PSP)  stimulations  every  25  ms, 

followed  by  a single  PSP  after  600  ms.  (E)  Connectivity  patterns  of  chemical  synapses  within  the  modeled 

circuit.  Left:  convergence  of  connections  received  by  the  TC  and  TRN  neurons.  Right:  ratio  of  connections 

from  different  pathways  received  by  TC  and  TRN  populations.  Data  is  compared  against  another 

thalamocortical  model  [52] . (F)  Gap  junction  (electrical)  coupling  within  the  TRN  population.  Number  of 

neurons  coupled  to  each  TRN  neuron  in  the  model  and  comparison  with  experimental  data  [53] . See 

Methods  for  details.  TC:  thalamocortical;  VPM:  ventral  posteromedial  nucleus  of  the  thalamus;  TRN: 

thalamic reticular nucleus. 

Detailed computational model of the thalamo-cortical circuit in the mouse whisker pathway 

The  computational  model  of  the  whisker  pathway  circuits  developed  in  this  study  includes  1,560  neurons, 

including  562  detailed  morphological  reconstructions  of  TC  and  TRN  neurons  within  a thalamic  barreloid  in 

VPM  and  its  projecting  region  in  TRN  (Fig  1A-B ).  The  morphological  and  biophysical  properties  of  these 

neurons  were  extracted  from  a computational  model  of  the  mouse  non-barreloid  thalamus  [52,54]  (Fig  1C )

and  adapted  to  represent  the  barreloid  structure  and  TRN  sector  based  on  experimental  data 

[2,21,27,55–58] . The  remaining  998  neurons  are  implemented  as  artificial  generators  of  precisely-timed 

spiking patterns and divided between the brainstem (180) and cortical (818) populations. 

These  neurons  communicate  via  chemical  synapses  with  short-term  plasticity  reflecting 

pathway-specific  properties,  such  as  driver  and  modulator  characteristics  [58] , and  via  dendro-dendritic 

electrical  synapses  in  the  TRN  population  [59]  (Fig  1D ).  These  pathway-specific  properties  are  used  to 

determine  the  connectivity  rules  between  each  pre- and  post-synaptic  population.  Driver  synapses 

(MLe→TC  and  TC→TRN)  carry  the  main  afferent  information  to  the  postsynaptic  neuron  and  present 

short-term  depression.  Conversely,  modulator  synapses  influence  the  firing  properties  of  the  postsynaptic 

neuron,  without  being  responsible  for  triggering  the  action  potential,  and  these  synapses  can  be  either 

facilitating  (CT→TC  and  CT→TRN)  or  depressing  (TRN→TC  and  TRN→TRN)  [60] . Driver  synapses  were 

placed  in  the  soma  and  proximal  dendrites  of  postsynaptic  cells,  and  modulator  synapses  targeted  the 

intermediate  and  distal  zones  of  the  dendritic  tree  [60,61] . In  total,  the  circuit  includes  approximately  690k 

8

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

synapses  across  95k  cell-to-cell  connections,  of  which  3.4k  are  gap  junctions  between  TRN  neurons  (see 

detailed  description  in  Methods ).  The  average  number  of  cell-to-cell  connections  for  TC  and  TRN  neurons 

is shown in detail in  Fig 1E , and the distribution  of intra-TRN gap junctions is shown in  Fig 1F .

Unified thalamo-cortical model reproduces sleep and wake state dynamics 

To  evaluate  the  baseline  circuit  dynamics,  we  characterized  the  model's  response  under  10  Hz  brainstem 

input  and  5 Hz  cortical  feedback  (Fig  2A ) [52] . For  the  baseline  characterization,  we  initially  assumed 

uniform  intrathalamic  connectivity;  the  influence  of  different  circuit  connectivity  configurations  on  the 

model's  response  is  explored  in  later  sections.  Hence,  the  probability  of  connection  between  neurons  in  the 

pre- and  postsynaptic  populations  was  the  same,  regardless  of  their  spatial  distribution.  The  number  of 

connections  received  by  each  cell  was  determined  based  on  cell  convergence  data  for  the  TC→TRN  and 

TRN→TC pathways  [52]  (Fig 2B ). 

By  default,  the  model  exhibits  synchronized  activation  of  TC  and  TRN  populations  in  the  spindle 

frequency  range  (8–16  Hz)  [48] , which  are  consistent  with  a sleep-like  state.  These  properties  were 

inherited  from  the  original  implementation  of  the  model,  which  focused  on  the  non-barreloid  sensory 

thalamus  [52] . This  result  suggests  that  the  convergence  and  divergence  matching  in  our  implementation 

(Fig 1E ) preserves the network balance, yielding similar  activity in the sleep-like state. 

Following,  we  simulated  a wake-like  state  in  the  model  state  by  adjusting  the  resting  membrane 

potential  (RMP)  of  the  TC  and  TRN  neurons,  and  scaling  the  strength  of  key  synaptic  pathways  and 

GABAergic  input  to  reduce  oscillatory  activity  in  the  circuit  (Fig  2C ).  These  modifications  are  grounded  in 

previous  experimental  and  modeling  results  [9,38,40–42,62,63] , and  reflect  a phenomenological 

representation  of  the  wake-like  activity,  with  abolishment  of  oscillatory  activity  and  transition  to  a linear 

regime.  Most  notably,  we  rescaled  the  conductance  of  the  T-type  Ca 2+  current  (iT)  and  the 

hyperpolarization-activated  cation  current  (iH),  which  are  the  key  players  in  generating  sustained  oscillatory 

activity  in  the  intrathalamic  networks  [63] , and  the  persistent  sodium  current  (iNap),  to  prevent  runaway 

excitability  following  the  positive  RMP  shift  in  TC  and  TRN  [64] . We  also  increased  the  conductance  of  the 

A-type  calcium  current  (iA),  which  is  known  to  act  as  a “shock-absorbing”  current,  reducing  network 

synchronization,  which  can  trigger  oscillatory  activity  [65] . Moreover,  we  rescaled  the  strength  of  GABAergic 

inputs  within  the  TRN  and  to  the  TC  neurons,  based  on  previous  reports  that  measured  changes  in  its 

concentration  during  sleep  and  awake  states  [41] . See  Table  1 for  a detailed  summary  of  the  cellular  and 

9

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

synaptic  properties  that  reflected  the  change  from  sleep-like  to  wake-like  state.  These  manipulations 

abolished  oscillatory  activity  and  synchronized  firing  (Fig  2D-F ),  as  evidenced  by  the  reduction  in  spindle 

power  (Fig  2G-H ).  These  two  states  form  the  foundation  for  subsequent  experiments,  in  which  we 

investigate how intrathalamic connectivity shapes circuit dynamics. 

Fig 2. Reproduction of sleep- and wake-like dynamics in the thalamo-cortical model. 

(A)  Circuit  diagram  illustrating  the  thalamo-cortical  model  architecture  used  to  simulate  baseline  dynamics. 

(B)  Diagram  of  uniform  intrathalamic  connectivity  based  on  cell  convergence  data.  (C)  Illustration  of  the 

parameter  adjustments  required  to  transition  from  sleep  to  wake  states,  including  changes  in 

neuromodulation-related  cellular  properties  and  GABA  neurotransmitter  concentration  (Table  1).  (D-E) 

Model  response  during  sleep  and  wake  states,  including  (D)  stacked  membrane  voltage  of  TRN  neurons 

(grey)  and  average  membrane  voltage  in  TRN  (red);  and  (E)  TC  and  TRN  spiking  raster  plots.  (F)  TC  and 

TRN  LFP  recordings.  (G)  PSD  of  the  TC  and  TRN  LFP  for  sleep- vs  wake-like  conditions,  with  the  spindle 

frequency  range  (8–16  Hz)  highlighted  in  grey  (Solid  line:  mean  value;  shaded  intervals:  standard 

deviation).  (H)  Statistical  comparison  of  LFP  power  in  the  spindle  frequency  range  (8–16  Hz)  between  sleep 

10 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

and  wake  states.  Significant  decrease  in  spindle  power  was  observed  in  the  wake  state  compared  to  the 

sleep  state  (Two-sided  Mann-Whitney  U test;  TRN:  p-value=3.92e-95****,  TC:  p-value=1.11e-94****).  TC: 

thalamocortical;  TRN:  thalamic  reticular  nucleus;  LFP:  local  field  potential;  PSD:  power  spectral  density; 

GABA: gamma-aminobutyric acid. 

Table 1: Model parameters used to simulate the sleep vs wake states 

i )  Simulation parameter  Sleep  Wake 

Rescale 

maximum 

conductance 

iT  1.0  0.25 

iH  1.0  0.25 

iNap  1.0  0.25 

iA  1.0  1.5 

RMP (mV) 

TC  -61  -58 

TRN  -71  -58 

Rescale GABA 

strength 

TRN→TC  1.0  0.3 

TRN→TRN  1.0  0.5 

Rescale 

AMPA/NMDA 

strength 

MLe→TC  3.0  3.0 

TC→TRN  0.5  0.5 

CT→TC  1.0  1.0 

CT→TRN  1.5  1.5 

ii  ) Tuning targets  Sleep  Wake 

Firing Rate 

(Hz) 

TC  6–9  9–15 

TRN  9–15  9–15 

Spindle 

Frequency (Hz) 

TC  8–16  -

TRN  8–16  -

iii  ) Model's response  Sleep  Wake 

Firing Rate 

(Hz) 

TC  7.86  10.3 

TRN  11.2  11.9 

Spindle 

Frequency (Hz) 

TC  13 (peak)  -

TRN  13 (peak)  -

11 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Whisker deflection model accurately captures brainstem barrelette activity and angular tuning 

To  produce  realistic  thalamic  activity,  it  is  essential  to  drive  the  circuit  model  with  biologically  realistic 

brainstem  inputs.  To  achieve  this,  we  developed  an  empirical  spiking  model  of  a brainstem  barrelette 

(hereafter  referred  to  as  the  “whisker  deflection”  model),  guided  by  experimental  data  on  peristimulus 

time-histogram  (PSTH)  responses  to  whisker  deflections  (Fig  3A ) [2]  and  angular  tuning  (Fig  3B ) [1]  of 

these  neurons.  The  whisker  deflection  model  comprises  180  artificial  spike  generators,  each  maximally 

responsive  to  a 2°  sector  in  polar  coordinates  determined  by  their  depth,  consistent  with  experimental 

estimates  [27,66] . The  model  can  represent  whisker  deflections  in  any  direction  by  scaling  the  spiking 

probability of each neuron based on its relative position along the y-axis ( Fig 3C ). 

To  validate  the  whisker  deflection  model,  we  produced  eight  16-second  stimulation  datasets  (0°  to 

315°,  in  45°  increments)  (Fig  3D-F ),  computed  their  angular  tuning  responses  (Fig  3G ),  and  compared  the 

average  tuning  response  to  experimental  data  (Fig  3H ) [1] . During  baseline  activity,  the  background  inputs 

provided  a uniform  20Hz  stimulation  [52] , with  a transient  increase  in  firing  during  each  whisker  deflection, 

totaling  ~30Hz  altogether.  These  firing  rates  were  based  on  PSTH  experimental  recordings  for  baseline  and 

whisker  deflection  spike  probabilities  [1] . As  for  the  TC  and  TRN  neurons,  the  firing  rate,  including  whisker 

deflections,  was  around  13  Hz  for  both  populations,  also  approximating  experimental  findings  [1] . The  result 

is  a realistic  computational  model  of  brainstem  inputs  that  provides  the  thalamo-cortical  model  with 

accurate  spiking  activity  representing  whisker  deflections  in  eight  different  directions  (Fig  3H ).  See  Methods 

and  Supporting  information  for  further  details  on  the  whisker  deflection  algorithm,  spike  probabilities,  and 

the  calculation  of  angular  tuning.  Additional  information  on  generating  these  spike  times  can  be  found  in  the 

source code linked with this publication. 

12 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint Fig  3.  Reproducing  brainstem  barrelette  activity  and  angular  tuning  with  a realistic  whisker 

deflection model. 

(A-B)  Fitting  of  experimental  brainstem  activity  data  during  whisker  deflection,  including  (A)  PSTH  of  spike 

probabilities  [2]  and  (B)  angular  tuning  [1] . (C)  Illustration  of  cell  positions  and  maximally  responsive  angles, 

and  spiking  activity  sampled  based  on  fitted  spike  probability  and  angular  tuning  models,  representing  180 

spike  generators  (2°  resolution,  0°–358°).  (D)  Protocol  for  generating  spiking  datasets  representing  whisker 

deflections  at  eight  angles  (0°  to  315°  in  45°  increments).  (E)  Reference  coordinate  map  and  deflection 

angles  used  for  dataset  generation.  (F)  Example  raster  plot  showing  generated  spike  activity  for  a 180° 

whisker  deflection.  (G)  Angular  tuning  maps  corresponding  to  each  deflection  angle  depicted  in  (E).  Grey 

box  shows  the  angular  tuning  map  for  the  spikes  in  (F).  (H)  Average  angular  tuning  map  derived  from  the 

whisker  deflection  model  compared  to  experimental  data  (aligned  to  270°  reference  angle)  [1] . For  detailed 

descriptions  of  spike  sampling  and  angular  tuning  calculation  methods,  see  Methods  and  Supporting 

information . PSTH: peristimulus time histogram. 

Thalamo-cortical model exhibits angular tuning in the awake state 

To  characterize  the  circuit’s  response  to  whisker  deflection  inputs  in  the  awake  state,  we  measured  the 

average  angular  tuning  in  the  thalamus.  This  process  is  illustrated  in  Fig  4, considering  a uniform 

connectivity  between  thalamic  populations  as  a starting  point  (Fig  4A ).  Experimental  studies  consider  the 

first  20  ms  window  of  spiking  to  characterize  the  angular  tuning  in  response  to  a whisker  deflection,  which 

captures  the  transient  increase  in  spiking  activity  in  thalamus  and  brainstem  (see  example  in  Fig  3A ). 

Therefore,  for  each  of  the  eight  whisker  deflection  directions,  we  extracted  the  first  20  ms  of  spiking  activity 

across  14  deflection  events.  We  aligned  all  responses  to  a common  reference  direction  (270°),  pooled  the 

data  across  cells,  and  normalized  it  by  the  total  spiking  activity  at  270°  for  the  MLe,  TC,  and  TRN 

populations  [1,2]  (Fig  4B-C ).  The  result  was  a combined  angular  tuning  map,  representing  the  average 

tuning of each population in the model ( Fig 4D ). 

The  angular  tuning  map  shows  a clear  transference  of  the  angular  tuning  from  the  MLe  (brainstem)  to 

the  TC  (thalamic  relay)  population,  driven  by  the  topological  connectivity  of  these  projections.  The  TRN 

population,  however,  shows  no  preferential  tuning,  which  is  expected,  since  both  the  feedforward  TC→TRN 

and  the  feedback  TRN→TC  connections  are  uniformly  distributed.  In  the  following  section  we  will  explore 

14 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

the  effects  of  gradually  replacing  these  uniform  connections  by  either  open- or  closed-loops,  and  its 

influence in the angular tuning. 

Fig 4. Angular tuning response in a thalamo-cortical circuit with uniform connectivity. 

(A)  Circuit  diagram  illustrating  the  thalamo-cortical  model  in  the  awake-like  state,  with  uniform  connectivity 

between  TC  and  TRN  populations.  (B)  Raster  plots  of  spiking  activity  in  MLe,  TC,  and  TRN  cell  populations 

in  response  to  repeated  whisker  deflection  inputs  presented  at  1-second  intervals  (CT  5 Hz  baseline  spiking 

not  shown).  (C)  Angular  tuning  maps  depicting  responses  from  MLe,  TC,  and  TRN  populations  across  the 

eight  whisker  deflection  directions.  (D)  Average  angular  tuning  map  computed  by  aligning  responses  from 

15 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

all  deflection  directions  to  a common  reference  (270°),  pooling,  and  normalizing  spike  counts  for  each 

population.  See  Methods  for  additional  details  on  spike  extraction,  alignment,  and  angular  tuning 

calculations.  MLe:  medial  lemniscus;  TC:  thalamocortical;  TRN:  thalamic  reticular  nucleus;  CT: 

corticothalamic. 

Closed-loop intrathalamic connectivity best supports angular tuning in the thalamus 

Although  the  spatial  distribution  of  brainstem  barrelette  projections  to  thalamic  barreloids  is  well 

characterized  [27,28,67] , the  pattern  of  neuron-to-neuron  connectivity  within  the  thalamus  remains  elusive. 

Specifically,  a key  open  question  is  whether  feedforward  and  feedback  projections  between  TC  neurons 

across  different  thalamic  relay  nuclei  (e.g.,  VPM  barreloids)  and  the  TRN  follow  a closed-loop  or  open-loop 

organization  [14–19]  (Fig  5A-B ).  In  a fully  open-loop  circuit,  the  intrathalamic  feedforward  connections  (from 

TC→TRN)  are  on-center  (targeting  the  same  region/cells  where  it  received  input  from)  (Fig  5A ),  and  the 

intrathalamic  feedback  connections  (from  TRN→TC)  are  off-center  (targeting  outside  of  the  input  source) 

(Fig  5A ).  Conversely,  in  a fully  closed-loop  circuit,  both  the  intrathalamic  feedforward  and  feedback 

connections are on-center. 

To  investigate  intrathalamic  synaptic  organization,  we  systematically  replaced  the  uniform  connections 

between  TC  and  TRN  populations  by  either  open- or  closed-loop  connections,  and  assessed  their  effects 

on  angular  tuning  in  the  awake  state  (Fig  5C ).  To  do  this,  we  introduced  a connectivity  symmetry  index, 

which  is  defined  as  the  signed  fraction  of  uniform  TC↔TRN  connections  that  were  replaced  by  either  open-

or closed-loop connections: 

Equation 1: 

𝐶𝑆𝐼  = 𝑠  𝑁 𝑟𝑒𝑝 

> 𝑁

Where: 

is  the  total  number  of  initially  uniform  connections,  is  the  number  of  connections  replaced,  and 𝑁  𝑁 𝑟𝑒𝑝 

for  replacement  by  closed-loop  connections,  and  for  replacement  by  open-loop  connections. 𝑠  = 1 𝑠  =−  1

Thus,  CSI  = 0.0  denotes  fully  uniform  connectivity,  CSI  = 1.0  denotes  complete  replacement  by  closed-loop 

connectivity,  and  CSI  = -1.0  denotes  complete  replacement  by  open-loop  connectivity.  We  simulated 

circuits  with  CSIs  ranging  from  -1.0  to  1.0  in  increments  of  0.25  (equivalent  to  replacing  25%  of 

16 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

connections),  measured  how  connectivity  affects  angular  tuning  (Fig  5D ),  and  evaluated  it  against 

experimental data ( Fig 5E ). 

To  compare  the  differences  in  angular  tuning  across  different  connectivity  arrangements,  we 

calculated  the  “area  ratio”  for  the  angular  tuning  maps,  dividing  the  area  of  the  TC  and  TRN  angular  tuning 

maps  by  the  area  of  the  MLe  angular  tuning  map.  We  found  that  the  TC  area  ratio  remained  unchanged 

across  circuit  manipulations  (Fig  5F ),  due  to  the  dominance  of  topological  MLe→TC  feedforward 

projections,  implemented  based  on  detailed  anatomical  studies  [28,67] . In  contrast,  TRN  neurons  showed  a

decrease  in  the  area  ratio  as  uniform  connections  were  replaced  by  either  open- or  closed-loop,  indicating  a

sharpening  in  the  tuning  (Fig  5F ).  This  effect  was  attributed  to  identical  feedforward  TC→TRN  on-center 

connectivity,  which  is  shared  across  all  opposing  CSI  configurations  (e.g.,  CSI  = -0.5  and  CSI  = 0.5  share 

the same intrathalamic feedforward connectivity, but opposite feedback connections). 

To  evaluate  whether  the  changes  in  the  angular  tuning  maps  reflected  an  increase  in  tuning,  we 

compared  spike  counts  for  neurons  most  responsive  to  the  deflection  angle  of  interest  (remapped  to  270°, 

termed  “aligned”)  with  those  most  responsive  to  the  opposite  angle  (remapped  to  90°,  termed  “opposite”) 

(Fig  5G ).  In  TRN,  increasing  feedforward  on-center  connectivity  boosted  firing  rates  of  aligned  neurons  and 

reduced  activity  of  opposite  neurons  (Fig  5G;  Table  S1i ),  regardless  of  whether  feedback  was  off-center 

(open-loop)  or  on-center  (closed-loop).  In  TC,  aligned  neurons  consistently  fired  more  under  every 

condition, reinforcing the role of MLe inputs in driving angular tuning in this population ( Fig 5G; Table  S1i ). 

Moreover,  the  spreading  in  the  number  of  TC  neuron  spikes  in  open-loop  circuits  (CSI  < 0)  suggests  a

higher  variability  in  the  spiking  activity  compared  with  closed-loop  circuits  (CSI  > 0)  (Fig  5G ).  To  evaluate 

that,  we  assessed  angular  tuning  variability  by  calculating  the  root  mean  square  error  between  the  model 

and  experimental  angular  tuning  maps  (AT RMSE ).  Our  results  show  that  TC  neurons  in  open-loop  circuits 

(CSI  < 0)  showed  higher  AT RMSE  relative  to  both  uniform  and  closed-loop  circuits  (CSI  ≥ 0)  (Fig  5H,  box; 

Table  S1ii-iii ).  Besides  that,  TRN  neurons  in  both  open- and  closed-loop  circuits  exhibited  lower  AT RMSE 

compared to the uniform circuit ( Fig 5H, top; Table  S1ii ). 

In  summary,  we  show  that  closed-loop  connections  can  successfully  transfer  the  TC→TRN  tuning 

without  significantly  increasing  the  variability  in  the  spiking  activity.  While  a uniform  circuit  also  keeps 

variability  low,  it  fails  to  transfer  the  TC→TRN  tuning.  Taken  together,  these  results  highlight  the  strong 

influence  of  feedforward  on-center  input  from  TC,  and  suggest  that  off-center  TRN  feedback  is  detrimental 

for  TC  angular  tuning.  It  also  shows  that  we  can  use  the  angular  tuning  response  as  a metric  to  assess  the 

17 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

level  of  feedforward  topological  connectivity  in  the  circuit.  In  the  following  section,  we  extend  our  analysis  of 

circuit connectivity to the sleep state, examining the role of TRN feedback in generating spindle oscillations. 

Fig 5. Effects of intrathalamic connectivity in TC and TRN angular tuning. 

(A)  Schematic  representation  of  on-center  and  off-center  alignment  of  connections  between  pre- and 

post-synaptic  populations.  (B)  Definition  of  open-loop  and  closed-loop  configurations  based  on 

18 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

combinations  of  on- and  off-center  alignment  of  feedforward  and  feedback  projections.  (C)  Diagram  of 

intrathalamic  circuit  configurations  tested,  ranging  from  fully  open-loop  (CSI  = -1.0),  uniform  (CSI  = 0.0),  to 

fully  closed-loop  (CSI  = 1.0),  varied  in  steps  of  25%.  (D)  Angular  tuning  maps  for  each  circuit  configuration. 

Generated  using  methods  described  in  Fig  4.  (E)  Experimental  angular  tuning  data  used  to  validate  the 

model  [1] . Area  ratio  calculated  relative  to  MLe  for  TC  and  TRN  populations.  (F)  Quantification  of  angular 

tuning  map  areas  normalized  to  MLe  tuning  area,  highlighting  changes  across  connectivity  conditions.  (G) 

Spike  count  analysis  of  aligned  and  opposite  neurons  (maximally  responsive  to  270°  and  90°,  respectively) 

for  each  circuit  configuration,  illustrating  differential  spiking  patterns  related  to  connectivity.  Boxplot  and 

shading  reflect  variability  in  the  total  number  of  spikes  of  aligned  and  opposite  neurons  across  different 

deflection  directions  (aligned  to  270°),  for  each  CSI.  (H)  AT RMSE  of  TC  and  TRN  populations  across  all  circuit 

configurations.  Boxplot  and  shading  reflect  variability  across  all  angles  (except  for  270°,  which  is  the 

normalization  reference)  for  each  CSI.  Statistical  analyses  and  details  are  provided  in  Table  S1  of 

Supporting  Information . MLe:  medial  lemniscus;  TC:  thalamocortical;  TRN:  thalamic  reticular  nucleus;  CT: 

corticothalamic; CSI: connectivity symmetry index; AT RMSE : root mean squared error of the angular tuning. 

Closed-loop intrathalamic connectivity supports spindle oscillations under CT Up/Down modulation 

A hallmark  feature  of  thalamic  circuits  during  sleep  is  their  ability  to  engage  spindle  oscillations  in  response 

to  cortical  Up/Down  modulation.  To  assess  how  intrathalamic  connectivity  influences  this  phenomenon,  we 

tested  the  response  of  different  circuit  configurations  in  the  sleep-like  state  (Fig  6A-B ) to  CT  Up/Down 

modulation (500/1500 ms, respectively) ( Fig 6C ). 

In  Fig  6D-E , we  show  the  spiking  activity  and  spectral  characteristics  of  a uniform  thalamic  network 

(CSI  = 0.0),  highlighting  the  increased  power  within  the  spindle  frequency  range  during  CT  Up  states.  To 

systematically  evaluate  the  effect  of  connectivity  on  the  generation  of  sleep  spindles,  we  quantified  spindle 

power  by  band-pass  filtering  (8–16  Hz)  the  local  field  potential  (LFP)  signals  from  the  TC  and  TRN 

populations.  The  filtered  LFP  was  then  subdivided  into  Up  (500  ms)  and  Down  (500  ms)  epochs,  and  we 

measured  the  mean  LFP  envelope  amplitude  (Fig  6F-G , see  legend  for  details).  We  used  this  measure  to 

compare  the  spindle-range  LFP  amplitude  in  Up  and  Down  states  across  different  circuit  connectivity 

configurations  (Fig  6H ) (See  Fig.  S1  for  a visual  comparison  of  the  spiking  activity  across  all  circuit 

configurations). 

19 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Our  findings  indicate  that  closed-loop  connectivity  best  supports  spindle  oscillations  in  the  barreloid 

thalamo-cortical  circuit,  while  increasing  open-loop  connectivity  disrupts  them.  Specifically,  open-loop 

projections  (CSI  < -0.25)  weaken  spindle  power  in  Up  states  relative  to  uniform  connectivity  (CSI  = 0.0),  for 

both  TC  and  TRN,  with  the  effect  becoming  more  pronounced  as  open-loop  connectivity  increases  (Fig  6H; 

Table  S2i ).  By  contrast,  TC  and  TRN  closed-loop  circuits  exhibit  stronger  Up  state  spindle  power  than  an 

equivalent  open-loop  circuit,  as  uniform  connections  are  gradually  replaced  (Fig  6H;  Table  S2ii ).  Moreover, 

increasing  the  number  of  open-loop  connections  reduces  the  difference  in  spindle-range  LFP  amplitude 

between Up and Down states, but the opposite is not true for closed-loop connections ( Fig 6H, Table S2iii ). 

In  summary,  these  results  highlight  that  closed-loop  connectivity  supports  network  synchronization, 

working  as  a viable  mechanism  for  sustaining  spindle  oscillations.  Conversely,  open-loop  circuits  promote 

propagation of activity, supporting a traveling wave-like type of activity ( Fig S1 ). 

20 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig 6. Open-loop connectivity disrupts spindle oscillations during CT Up states. 

(A)  Circuit  diagram  illustrating  the  model  configured  for  the  sleep  state.  (B)  Intrathalamic  circuit 

configurations  tested,  combining  open-loop,  uniform,  and  closed-loop  projections.  (C)  Spiking  raster  plot 

showing  CT  Up/Down  states,  with  cells  spiking  at  5 Hz  and  1 Hz,  respectively.  (D)  Spiking  raster  plots  of  TC 

21 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

and  TRN  populations  during  CT  Up/Down  modulation.  See  Fig.  S1  for  a visual  comparison  across  all  circuit 

configurations.  (E)  Spectrograms  highlighting  the  thalamic  population  activity,  with  red  brackets  indicating 

the  spindle  frequency  range  (8–16  Hz).  (F)  LFP  signals  from  TC  and  TRN  populations,  and  segmentation  of 

Up/Down  states.  The  central  part  of  the  Down  segment  was  also  segmented  to  ensure  that  any  oscillations 

returned  to  baseline  after  the  Up  state.  (G)  Segment  of  the  LFP  signal  filtered  within  the  spindle  frequency 

range.  Up  and  Down  epochs  were  used  to  calculate  the  signal  envelope,  and  the  mean  envelope 

amplitudes  were  computed  to  quantify  spindle  oscillations.  (H)  Distribution  of  mean  LFP  envelope 

amplitudes  during  CT  Up  and  Down  states  across  all  intrathalamic  circuit  configurations  (CSI:  [-1.0,  1.0]), 

demonstrating  the  differential  impact  of  closed- vs  open-loop  connectivity  on  spindle  oscillations.  See  Table 

S2  in  Supporting  information  for  detailed  statistical  analyses.  TC:  thalamocortical;  TRN:  thalamic  reticular 

nucleus; CT: corticothalamic; CSI: connectivity symmetry index; LFP: local field potential. 

Closed-loop fast CT feedback sharpens angular tuning 

Previous  experimental  work  has  shown  that  TC  inputs  can  monosynaptically  activate  CT  neurons,  in  turn 

providing  feedback  to  TC  and  TRN  neurons  [45–47,68] . However,  the  functional  significance  of  this  fast 

feedback  remains  poorly  explored.  In  the  barrel  system,  such  fast  feedback  pathways  may  form  a positive 

loop  that  amplifies  topologically  organized  signals  originating  from  downstream  brainstem  inputs.  To  test 

this  idea,  we  simulated  the  fast  activation  of  CT  neurons  by  adding  a delayed  (13.1  ms)  [45]  angular-tuned 

response  to  the  CT  spiking  population  (Fig  7A ).  We  evaluated  the  effect  of  this  fast  activation  on  angular 

tuning  across  three  circuit  configurations,  varying  the  connectivity  of  the  TC↔TRN  circuit,  and  the  CT→TC 

and  CT→TRN  feedbacks  from  uniform  to  fully  closed-loop  (CSI  = 0.0,  CSI  = 0.5,  and  CSI  = 1.0)  (Fig  7B ). 

We  also  evaluated  the  case  where  only  the  TC↔TRN  circuit  connectivity  varies,  while  the  CT→TC  and 

CT→TRN feedbacks remain fully uniform ( Fig 7C ), like  in previous simulations ( Figs 5-6 ). 

In  both  cases  (Fig  7B-C ),  we  modulated  the  response  of  the  CT  neurons  by  adding  an  artificial 

angular  tuning  feedback  representing  the  activation  of  CT  afferents.  For  each  circuit  configuration,  we  ran 

different  instances  of  the  model  progressively  increasing  the  fraction  of  activated  CT  neurons  (0%,  10%, 

25%,  50%,  100%)  (Fig  7D ),  to  determine  how  selective  recruitment  of  CT  feedback  influences  angular 

tuning. 

To  quantify  the  effect  of  angular-tuned  CT  feedback  in  the  thalamic  network,  we  compared  the  spiking 

activity  of  neurons  aligned  and  opposite  to  the  deflection  angle  (for  visualization  purposes,  we  remapped  all 

22 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

aligned  responses  to  270°  and  opposite  to  90°)  (Fig  7E-F ).  This  allowed  for  a visual  comparison  of  the 

changes  in  spiking  by  inspecting  the  differences  in  size  and  shape  of  the  tuning  maps  for  TRN  and  TC 

populations  under  different  circuit  configurations  and  levels  of  CT  modulation  (Fig  7E-F ).  Our  findings  show 

that  circuits  including  both  intrathalamic  and  corticothalamic  closed-loop  connections  (CSI  = 1.0)  exhibited 

the  highest  differences  in  spiking  between  aligned  and  opposite  neurons  (Fig  7E ),  particularly  for  the  TRN 

population  (Fig  S2A).  Notably,  aligned  TRN  neurons  showed  significantly  higher  firing  rates  with  increasing 

CT  modulation,  while  the  firing  rate  of  opposite  neurons  remained  unchanged  (Fig  S2A;  Table  S3i ).  This 

difference  in  TRN  spiking  between  aligned  and  opposite  neurons  was  diminished  in  the  circuit  with  mixed 

intrathalamic  and  corticothalamic  closed-loop  connectivity  (CSI  = 0.5),  and  not  present  in  the  uniform  circuit 

(CSI  = 0.0),  underscoring  the  critical  role  of  intrathalamic  and  corticothalamic  closed-loop  circuits  in 

fine-tuning angular selectivity. 

Lastly,  while  the  spiking  activity  of  aligned  neurons  increased  with  CT  feedback  across  all  conditions, 

in  the  closed-loop  circuit  (CSI  = 1.0),  the  spiking  activity  of  opposite  neurons  remained  similar  for  both  TC 

and  TRN  populations  (Figs  7E,S2A;  Table  S3ii ).  In  contrast,  this  effect  was  not  present  in  the  circuits  with 

uniform  CT  feedback  (Figs  7F,S2B;  Table  S4ii ),  where  the  spiking  activity  of  opposite  neurons  increased 

with  CT  modulation,  regardless  of  thalamic  connectivity  (CSI  = 0.0,  0.5,  and  1.0).  This  result  suggests  that 

closed-loop connectivity in the CT feedback can further sharpen the thalamic angular tuning. 

Taken  together,  our  findings  reveal  that  angular-tuned  CT  feedback  is  a powerful  mechanism  for 

sharpening  angular  tuning  in  circuits  containing  closed-loop  connectivity,  with  particularly  strong  effects  in 

TRN. Moreover, this effect is more pronounced when CT connectivity is organized in a closed-loop. 

23 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig 7. Closed-loop CT modulation selectively enhances angular tuning in thalamic circuits. 

(A)  Schematic  illustrating  simulation  of  monosynaptic  CT  activation,  with  angular-tuned  CT  modulation. 

(B-C)  Circuit  configurations  tested:  uniform  (CSI  = 0.0),  mixed  (CSI  = 0.5),  and  fully  closed-loop  (CSI  = 1.0), 

involving  the  intrathalamic  and  corticothalamic  connections  (B),  or  the  intrathalamic  connections  only, 

keeping  corticothalamic  connections  uniform  (C).  (D)  Illustration  of  different  levels  of  CT  modulation, 

representing  proportions  (0%,  10%,  25%,  50%,  100%)  of  total  neurons  showing  angular-tuned  responses 

(example  of  a 180°  whisker  deflection).  (E-F)  Differential  analysis  of  spiking  activity  in  TRN  and  TC  neurons 

under  increasing  levels  of  CT  modulation.  Analysis  of  spiking  activity  considered  aligned  neurons  (270°) 

versus  opposite  neurons  (90°)  relative  to  the  target  angle.  Side-by-side  comparison  of  the  influence  of  CT 

modulation  in  the  circuits  with  closed-loop  intrathalamic  and  corticothalamic  connections  (E),  versus  the 

circuit  with  closed-loop  intrathalamic  connections  and  uniform  CT  connections  (F).  See  Figure  S2  and 

Tables  S3  and  S4  in  Supporting  information  for  detailed  comparison  and  statistical  analyses.  TC: 

thalamocortical; TRN: thalamic reticular nucleus; CT: corticothalamic; CSI: connectivity symmetry index. 

24 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Discussion 

Key findings and contributions 

In  this  work,  we  developed  an  experimentally  validated,  detailed  computational  model  of  the 

thalamo-cortical  circuit  in  the  mouse  whisker  pathway  to  explore  the  effect  of  intrathalamic  connectivity  in 

sensory  relay  during  wakefulness  and  spindle  oscillations  during  sleep.  Our  results  demonstrate  that 

intrathalamic  closed-loop  connectivity  provides  the  better  arrangement  to  support  both  functions.  While  the 

balance  between  closed-loop  and  uniform  projections  influenced  the  sharpness  of  angular  tuning,  both 

configurations  promoted  spindle  activity.  In  contrast,  open-loop  connectivity  was  less  effective  in 

reproducing  the  experimentally  observed  angular  tuning  and  sleep  spindle  oscillations.  Additionally,  fast  CT 

feedback  modulated  thalamic  angular  tuning  maps,  resulting  in  sharpening  of  sensory  selectivity  only  when 

closed-loop  connectivity  was  present  in  both  intrathalamic  and  cortico-thalamic  circuits.  Below,  we  discuss 

the  key  model  features  and  results,  and  the  broad  implications  of  these  findings  for  understanding  the 

relationship between sensory processing, sleep regulation, and neural dynamics. 

Our  model  combines  several  key  features  of  thalamo-cortical  circuits  that  were  not  previously 

available  under  a unified  model,  enabling  it  to  investigate  the  effect  of  cellular  mechanisms  and  connectivity 

on  circuit  dynamics  and  function.  For  example,  previous  models  often  lacked  morphological  details,  realistic 

connectivity,  and/or  realistic  brainstem  and  CT  feedback  [52,69,70] . Our  model  reproduces  the  structure  of 

a thalamic  barreloid  in  the  VPM  nucleus  and  corresponding  TRN  region,  integrating  morphologically 

detailed  TC  and  TRN  neuronal  populations  with  accurate  spatial  distributions,  population-specific 

biophysical  parameters,  synaptic  short-term  dynamics,  precise  spatial  targeting,  and  realistic  spiking  inputs 

from  the  brainstem  and  cortical  inputs,  and  intrathalamic  topological  connectivity.  These  features 

collectively  enabled  us  to  reproduce  stimulus-locked  spike  timing,  fast  sensory  processing,  and  angular 

tuning  curves  during  wakefulness,  and  synchronized  spindle-like  oscillations  during  sleep  states  with  high 

fidelity  to  experimental  observations  [1,2,48,52] . Importantly,  the  model  can  simulate  both  the  active 

wakefulness  and  sleep-like  responses  and  state-dependent  oscillatory  dynamics  by  adjusting  cellular 

properties and synaptic weights consistent with experimental observations  [9,38,40–42,62] .

Our  novel  brainstem  whisker  deflection  model  directly  innervates  the  thalamus,  providing  a framework 

to  systematically  assess  how  features  such  as  intrathalamic  connectivity  influence  sensory  processing, 

particularly  angular  tuning  to  whisker  deflection.  This  whisker  deflection  model  was  built  based  on  data 

25 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

mapping  the  projections  from  the  brainstem  barrelettes  to  the  thalamic  barreloids,  focusing  on  the  transfer 

of  whisker  deflection  information  [27,28,56,67] . The  CT  circuit  was  dimensioned  to  represent  the  number  of 

corticothalamic  cells  in  a cortical  infrabarrel  in  layer  6 of  the  barrel  cortex,  enabling  a systematic  exploration 

of the CT modulation that regulates the activity of TC and TRN neurons  [68,71] .

Our  comprehensive  model  provides  a platform  for  exploring  hypotheses  about  thalamo-cortical 

dynamics  and  their  role  in  sensory  information  processing  [1,2]  and  sleep-related  activity,  providing  insights 

that  are  sometimes  inaccessible  via  experiments.  For  example,  combining  neuron  morphologies  and  ion 

channel  kinetics  with  population-level  connectivity  allows  for  an  in-depth  exploration  of  how  individual 

neuron  properties  influence  overall  circuit  behavior,  such  as  synaptic  integration  [72–74]  and  the  effects  of 

CT  and  TRN  localized  inputs  on  TC  neuron  responsiveness  [61,75] . Including  short-term  plasticity  in 

excitatory  and  inhibitory  synapses  enables  the  model  to  reproduce  realistic,  time-dependent  changes  in 

sensory  processing  and  the  modulation  of  thalamo-cortical  interactions  over  time  [52,76] . This  feature  is 

particularly  relevant  for  capturing  the  transient  changes  in  communication  efficiency  between  neurons 

during  different  states,  such  as  wakefulness  and  sleep,  allowing  researchers  to  study  the  role  of  synaptic 

plasticity in phenomena like sensory adaptation and the emergence of sleep spindles. 

Limitations of the study 

Although  our  model  represents  one  of  the  most  detailed  thalamic  circuit  models  to  date,  we  acknowledge  a

set  of  limitations.  First,  our  model  reproduces  the  thalamic  network  associated  with  a single  whisker,  while 

the  mouse  features  around  30  whiskers  on  each  side  of  the  body  [77] , and  thalamic  barreloids  are  subject 

to  modulation  by  neighboring  CT  barrels  via  lateral  projections  in  the  TRN  [78] . Second,  the  artificial  CT 

feedback  used  here  is  unidirectional,  overlooking  the  reciprocal  and  dynamic  nature  of  cortico-thalamic 

loops  (more  on  that  in  a following  section).  Third,  although  neuromodulatory  influences  are  accounted  for, 

explicit  biophysical  modeling  of  cholinergic  and  noradrenergic  pathways  was  not  included.  Additionally, 

other inputs from brainstem and cortical areas were omitted, limiting the model's functionality. 

We  also  acknowledge  that  there  are  some  methodological  limitations  in  our  experimental  design.  We 

explored  a relatively  limited  set  of  connectivity  arrangements  based  on  available  data,  but  which  may  not 

encompass  all  biologically  plausible  network  configurations.  Additionally,  the  strategy  we  adopted  to  create 

the  open- and  closed-loop  networks  does  not  take  into  account  how  axonal  projections  are  distributed 

within  neighboring  cells.  This  means  that  neurons  that  are  very  close  together  in  space  will  not  be 

26 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

differentially  targeted  when  receiving  a feedback  projection,  since  we  do  not  control  for  single-cell  pairwise 

open- or  closed-loops.  Evidence  of  such  an  organization,  where  a TRN  neuron  receives  input  from  a TC 

neuron and sends feedback to its neighbor, has been previously shown  [79–81] .

Moreover,  we  did  not  evaluate  the  influence  of  gap  junctions  in  combination  with  the  intrathalamic 

connectivity  in  this  study.  We  opted  for  that  to  keep  the  study  concise,  since  the  effects  of  gap  junctions 

have  been  extensively  explored  in  the  much  larger  non-barreloid  thalamic  network  that  our  model  was 

based on  [52] .

Future  studies  could  address  these  limitations  by  incorporating  a multi-whisker  configuration, 

bidirectional  cortico-thalamic  interactions,  improved  neuromodulatory  inputs,  and  refinement  of  cell-to-cell 

connectivity.  Experiments  explicitly  designed  to  validate  model  predictions  might  include  optogenetic 

manipulations  and  paired  recordings  from  neighboring  TRN  and  TC  cells,  to  selectively  activate  circuit 

motifs  and  test  predicted  pairwise  connectivity.  These  targeted  experimental  validations  would  significantly 

enhance the predictive value and biological relevance of our computational framework. 

Another  future  improvement  could  be  to  model  the  effects  of  sensory  adaptation  or  potentiation  in  the 

somatosensory  thalamus,  and  how  it  shapes  the  angular  tuning  during  repeated  whisker  deflections.  This 

process  involves  longer  timescales,  and  it  has  been  linked  to  the  recruitment  of  g-protein-coupled  receptors 

in  the  somatosensory  thalamus  [82–84] , in  contrast  with  the  spatial  and  temporally  aligned  modulation  of 

thalamic activity by activation of CT afferents  [78,85,86] .

Despite  these  constraints,  our  study  represents  a significant  advance  toward  understanding  how 

intrathalamic  connectivity  shapes  sensory  processing  and  emergent  thalamic  dynamics.  By  providing  a

versatile  and  systematically  constructed  model,  we  offer  a foundational  framework  that  future  experimental 

and computational efforts can refine and expand as new data become available. 

The role of intrathalamic connectivity in shaping angular tuning 

Tuning  maps  are  a fundamental  aspect  of  sensory  processing,  extending  far  beyond  the  whisker  system 

[87–96] . In  nearly  every  sensory  modality,  neurons  exhibit  selective  responses  to  specific  stimulus  features 

or  ranges  of  features,  emerging  either  at  the  single  cell  [27]  or  at  the  circuit  level  [93] . This  neural  selectivity 

allows  the  brain  to  represent,  differentiate,  and  interpret  a wide  variety  of  external  inputs,  serving  as  a

crucial  building  block  for  perceptual  processes  [97,98] . By  examining  tuning  properties  and  maps  across 

different  sensory  pathways,  researchers  gain  insights  into  how  neuronal  populations  encode  complex 

27 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

stimuli  and  how  these  representations  shape  both  local  microcircuit  dynamics  and  global  network  states 

involved  in  perception,  attention,  and  behavior  [99–101] . In  the  whisker  pathway,  angular  tuning  maps 

reveal  how  neurons  transform  and  integrate  sensory  inputs,  offering  insights  into  the  connectivity  and 

activity patterns underlying information processing in response to whisker deflection  [26,55] .

In  this  study,  we  showed  that  topological  inputs  play  a key  role  in  shaping  the  angular  tuning  response 

of  thalamic  neurons  in  the  whisker  pathway.  By  incorporating  experimentally  observed  topological 

projections  from  the  brainstem  to  the  thalamic  barreloid  [28]  and  systematically  varying  the  intrathalamic 

connectivity,  we  were  able  to  drive  TC  activity  that  reproduced  angular  tuning  patterns  measured  in  vivo  [1] 

and  showed  that  the  angular  tuning  propagation  from  TC  to  TRN  scales  proportionally  with  the  percentage 

of on-center feedforward TC→TRN connections. 

Topological  projections  can  enhance  precision  by  creating  localized,  high-intensity  firing  zones  for 

preferred  stimulus  features,  thereby  improving  discrimination  [1,26,27] . In  contrast,  less  orderly  projections 

(e.g.,  uniform  connectivity)  might  yield  more  diffuse  activity  that  could  mask  subtle  differences  in  incoming 

signals,  potentially  reducing  the  specificity  of  the  neuronal  response  [102] . By  varying  the  model's 

connectivity,  we  were  able  to  shape  the  tuning  curves  to  match  the  angular  tuning  observed  experimentally 

[1] . While  the  connectivity  from  MLe→TC  was  set  to  match  experimental  data,  we  were  able  to  shape  the 

TC→TRN  tuning  by  adjusting  the  percentage  of  on-center  feedforward  TC→TRN  connections.  This  result  is 

in  line  with  previous  studies  indicating  that  the  thalamic  circuit  in  the  whisker  pathway  is  highly  topological, 

showing  a clustering  of  cells  with  similar  angular  preference  along  the  depth  of  the  thalamic  barreloids 

[27,103] . Taken  together,  this  suggests  that  angular  tuning  could  be  used  as  a biomarker  to  estimate  the 

organization of TC→TRN connections. 

Our  model  suggests  that  closed-loop  TC↔TRN  connectivity  is  better  suited  to  support  angular  tuning, 

since  introducing  open-loop  connections  led  to  greater  variability  in  the  angular  tuning  maps  (TRN→TC 

AT RMSE , Fig  5H ).  This  impaired  fidelity  would  be  counterproductive  in  a system  whose  primary  function 

during wakefulness is to relay information from the brainstem to the cortex. 

The role of TRN feedback in regulating sleep-state dynamics 

The  transition  from  wake  to  sleep  is  characterized  by  a global  shift  in  circuit  dynamics  [7,48]  and  is  driven 

by  a series  of  neuromodulatory  inputs  that  alter  the  ionic  balance  and  conductance  of  transmembrane 

currents  [9,38,40–42,62] . As  the  brain  transitions  into  NREM  sleep,  thalamic  neurons  shift  from  the 

28 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

awake-associated  tonic  firing  to  burst  firing  [32,104] . They  also  show  a decreased  responsiveness  to 

external stimuli, and the N2 stage of NREM is marked by the emergence of spindle oscillations  [7,39,105] .

Our  model  reveals  that  different  connectivity  configurations  have  a pronounced  effect  on  spindles 

during  sleep.  We  observed  that  increasing  the  percentage  of  open-loop  connections  results  in  a

proportional  decrease  in  mean  LFP  envelope  amplitude,  impairing  the  circuit's  ability  to  sustain  robust 

spindle  oscillations.  In  contrast,  circuits  with  closed-loop  and/or  uniform  connectivity  preserve  a higher 

spindle  amplitude,  showing  that  reciprocal  closed-loop  interactions  between  the  TC  and  TRN  neurons  are 

supportive  of  spindle  oscillations.  This  result  aligns  with  physiological  observations  suggesting  that  thalamic 

circuits  rely  on  coordinated  feedback  loops  to  promote  synchronized  firing  and  regulate  sleep-related 

oscillations  [8,32,106] .

Additionally,  our  model  showed  coordinated  activation  of  thalamic  neurons  during  CT  Up  states, 

demonstrating  that  cortical  inputs  not  only  enhance  thalamic  excitability  but  also  act  as  a timing  signal  that 

can lock the onset of spindle waves to particular phases of the slow oscillation  [107] .

In  sum,  these  results  suggest  that  while  the  whisker-related  barreloid  circuit  may  be  structured  to 

optimize  angular  tuning  and  sensory  relay  during  wakefulness,  these  reciprocal  connections  can  also  be 

used  to  sustain  an  oscillatory  mode  during  sleep.  By  allowing  both  robust  spindle  generation  and  proper 

inhibitory  gating,  the  combined  presence  of  uniform  and  closed-loop  projections  may  offer  a biologically 

advantageous  balance:  effective  sensory  relay  when  the  system  is  awake  and  synchronization  of  sleep 

rhythms  when  neuromodulatory  inputs  shift  the  circuit  into  an  oscillatory  regime.  This  insight  highlights  the 

versatility  of  thalamic  circuits  and  underscores  the  functional  importance  of  TRN  feedback  in  orchestrating 

the thalamo-cortical dynamics that underlie the sleep state. 

Corticothalamic influence in processing information 

Coordinated  CT  feedback  can  significantly  enhance  the  precision  of  sensory  processing  by  selectively 

amplifying  relevant  inputs  and  suppressing  irrelevant  ones,  thereby  improving  sensory  discrimination 

[108,109] . It  is  also  speculated  that  CT  inputs  can  regulate  the  firing  properties  of  TC  neurons,  selectively 

switching  between  tonic  and  burst  firing  [110] . Our  simulations  show  that  closed-loop  CT  connections 

enhance  angular  tuning  by  selectively  boosting  aligned  neuronal  responses.  These  results  are  in  line  with 

previous  reports  showing  that  neurons  in  the  barrel  cortex  display  a preferred  direction,  similar  to  the 

brainstem and thalamus  [31,111] , and reinforce the  idea of a closed-loop CT connectivity. 

29 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Moreover,  the  different  responses  observed  in  the  model's  TC  and  TRN  populations  suggest  distinct 

roles  of  CT  feedback  across  nuclei.  The  pronounced  effect  of  CT  modulation  on  TRN  neurons  highlights 

their  critical  role  in  gating  and  regulating  sensory  relay  through  selective  inhibition  [4,112] . In  contrast,  relay 

nuclei  such  as  the  TC  neurons  in  VPM  appear  less  directly  modulated  by  CT  input,  likely  reflecting 

dominant feedforward inputs (e.g., from brainstem) that inherently shape their responses  [28,67] .

As  mentioned  previously,  we  acknowledge  that  representing  the  CT  feedback  as  a spiking  network 

has  its  drawbacks  compared  with  including  a population  of  biophysically  detailed  L6  CT  neurons.  However, 

that  only  makes  the  model  harder  to  constrain,  and  would  only  be  reasonable  in  the  context  of  including  a

full-scale  model  of  the  barrel  column.  Given  that  the  main  response  of  interest  in  our  study  is  the  angular 

tuning  in  the  network,  which  is  characterized  within  a 20  ms  window  following  the  whisker  deflection,  the 

effects  of  including  a detailed  model  of  the  CT  network  would  be  significantly  limited.  A study  from  Hirai  et 

al.  shows  the  profile  of  this  CT  response  with  rich  detail,  describing  the  temporal  dynamics  of  cortical 

neurons  in  a layer-specific  fashion,  highlighting  how  L6  CT  neurons  respond  within  the  same  temporal 

window  of  neurons  in  L4,  and  that  this  response  is  significantly  limited  to  a time  window  of  < 30  ms  [45] .

Therefore,  we  reasoned  that  a more  direct  strategy  to  test  the  effects  of  direct  activation  of  L6  CT  neurons 

would  be  to  assume  the  transfer  of  angular  tuned  information  from  TC  to  CT  neurons,  which  would  in  turn 

respond by propagating that activity back to thalamus. 

Moreover,  there  are  important  circuit-level  details  within  the  L6  CT  neurons  that  are  not  fully 

understood,  with  response  profiles  that  are  both  state-dependent  (varying  between  whisker-activated 

(16.5%),  -suppressed  (11.3%),  or  being  silent  (28.7%)  or  sparse  (43.5%)  firing)  [71]  and  context-dependent 

[113,114] . We  accounted  for  that  variability  by  gradually  increasing  the  number  of  angular-tuned  CT 

neurons,  showing  that  sharpening  of  angular  tuning  by  direct  CT  activation  was  consistent  across  different 

levels of CT modulation. 

These  results  collectively  suggest  a functional  model  in  which  selective  CT  activation  serves  to 

amplify  sensory  precision  through  targeted  modulation  of  thalamic  circuits.  This  idea  has  been  proposed 

before  [115] , but  this  is  the  first  demonstration  of  this  mechanism  in  a thalamic  circuit  computational  model. 

Moreover,  the  pronounced  effect  of  CT  modulation  observed  within  the  TRN  supports  a framework  in  which 

the  TRN  acts  as  a critical  node  for  enhancing  angular  discrimination,  potentially  through  selective  inhibition 

of  less  relevant  sensory  signals  [4,19,116] . This  mechanism  could  facilitate  improved  signal-to-noise  ratios 

30 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

and  more  precise  sensory  encoding  in  behavioral  contexts.  Future  studies  should  explore  the  behavioral 

and perceptual consequences of such selective CT modulation. 

Investigating open- and closed-loop circuits through computational modeling 

The  first  computational  model  of  a thalamic  relay  neuron  was  proposed  by  McCormick  and  Huguenard 

[117] , showing  that  thalamic  dynamics  could  be  reproduced  in  silico . Recent  studies  have  modeled  the 

dynamics  of  thalamic  cells  in  greater  detail,  combining  realistic  morphology  and  biophysics  of  these 

neurons,  as  well  as  synaptic  physiology  and  connectivity  [52,54] . However,  these  studies  focused  on  the 

principles  of  a general  thalamo-cortical  circuit,  whose  structure  and  synaptic  organization  differ  significantly 

from  the  barreloid  thalamus  [118,119]  and  did  not  address  the  question  of  whether  thalamic  circuits  are 

organized as open- or closed-loops, which remains unresolved  [14,19] .

Previous  computational  studies  have  addressed  this  question,  demonstrating  that  open-loop  circuits 

were  suitable  for  sustaining  the  propagation  of  thalamo-cortical  activity  [69,70] . However,  these  studies 

used  simplified  circuit  models  composed  of  single-compartment  neurons,  optimized  for  signal  propagation. 

In  doing  so,  they  did  not  consider  the  impacts  of  neuronal  morphology  [74]  and  the  timing  and  distribution  of 

presynaptic inputs  [110,120]  in the firing properties  of the circuit. 

In  contrast,  our  highly  detailed  model  captures  realistic  awake-state  dynamics  and  physiologically 

accurate  LFP  signatures,  providing  insights  into  circuit-level  phenomena  such  as  dendritic  integration,  input 

segregation,  and  spatial  coordination  [52,121–123] , which  are  not  accessible  in  simplified  circuit  models. 

Moreover,  our  systematic  investigation  of  intrathalamic  connectivity  using  a detailed  circuit  shows  that 

closed-loop  connectivity  can  also  support  the  propagation  of  oscillatory  activity,  previously  attributed 

primarily to open-loop circuits ( Fig 6H ). 

Identifying  a general  connectivity  strategy  across  thalamic  nuclei  requires  accounting  for  the  unique 

characteristics  of  each  sensory  modality  and  their  influence  on  network  development  and  synaptic 

organization.  In  this  context,  open- and  closed-loop  circuits  may  coexist  [19] : closed-loop  circuits  may 

support  local  processing  of  information  and  generation  of  sleep  spindles,  whereas  open-loop  motifs  are 

responsible for facilitating long-range intrathalamic communication  [124,125] .

31 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Methods 

This  section  describes  model  development  with  data  provenance,  major  features  of  the  final  model,  and  the 

analysis  and  experimental  methods.  The  full  documentation  of  the  final  model  and  analyses  is  the  source 

code itself. 

Data and code availability 

The  model  source  code,  analysis  scripts,  and  experimental  data  used  for  model  constraints  and  validation 

are  available  on  GitHub  at:  https://github.com/suny-downstate-medical-center/thalamus_netpyne . A

permanent  archive  of  the  simulation  output  data  generated  in  this  study  is  available  at 

https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.16888006 . The  model  source  code  is  fully  compatible  with  the  NetPyNE 

framework and can be exported to standardized formats such as SONATA and NeuroML. 

Any  additional  information  required  to  run  or  analyze  the  model  is  available  from  the  lead  contacts 

(jmoreira.research@gmail.com ; salvador.dura-bernal@downstate.edu ) upon request. 

Thalamo-cortical circuit 

The  thalamo-cortical  circuit  reconstructed  in  this  model  includes:  a thalamic  barreloid  composed  of  TC 

neurons  representing  the  VPM  nucleus;  a section  of  the  TRN  composed  of  GABAergic  neurons;  and  two 

whisker  deflection  models  representing  a brainstem  barrelette  and  the  CT  neurons  from  an  infrabarrel  in 

L6A  of  S1  (Fig  1A ).  Circuit  dimensions  and  number  of  cells  were  based  on  studies  that  reconstructed  the 

anatomy  and  cell  density  of  nuclei  in  the  brainstem,  thalamus,  and  cortex  (Fig  1B ) [25,68,126,127] . The 

resulting  circuit  model  contains  1,560  cells,  of  which  562  are  morphologically  and  biophysically  detailed 

thalamic  neurons  (346  TC  neurons,  216  TRN  neurons),  uniformly  distributed  across  the  volume  of  their 

respective nuclei ( Fig 1B ). 

Cell morphology and biophysics 

We  employed  existing  cell  models  from  a state-of-the-art  computational  model  of  the  non-barreloid 

thalamus  simulated  in  NEURON  [52] . To  ensure  morphological  diversity,  we  sampled  5 different  cell 

templates  for  each  population  (Fig  1C ).  We  modeled  the  remaining  neurons  in  the  circuit  as  artificial 

32 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

spike-generators,  representing  the  driver  and  modulatory  excitatory  inputs  from  a brainstem  barrelette  and 

a cortical infrabarrel, respectively ( Fig 1B ) [28,67,68] .

We  extracted  the  properties  of  the  non-barreloid  thalamic  microcircuit  using  the  snap  Python  package 

(v  0.13.0),  available  in  the  Blue  Brain  GitHub  repository,  and  converted  the  cell  models  to  the  SWC  format 

to import into NetPyNE. 

In  the  original  study,  the  cell  models  are  tuned  to  a very  low  RMP  and  require  a constant 

current-clamp  input  to  set  the  membrane  voltage  to  the  desired  level.  With  this  in  mind,  we  developed  an 

algorithm  to  replicate  the  current-clamp  input  combined  with  an  Ornstein-Uhlenbeck  process,  which  are 

used  to  provide  different  current  stimulations  to  set  the  RMPs  across  cells  in  the  source  model  [52] . For 

that,  we  current-clamped  each  cell  type  with  different  subthreshold  amplitudes  without  noise,  and  fitted  an 

equation  to  map  the  current  amplitude  required  to  set  the  membrane  at  a given  voltage  (more  details  can 

be  found  in  the  source  code ).  We  validated  the  cell  models  using  a current  clamp  protocol,  testing  the 

ability of the cells to generate tonic and burst firing under different conditions ( Fig 1C ). 

Model connectivity 

Connectivity  was  defined  based  on  studies  that  mapped  well-known  brainstem,  intrathalamic, 

thalamo-cortical,  and  corticothalamic  projections  [14,15,17,18,27,28,43,67,118] . The  parameters  used  to 

constrain  and  validate  the  circuit  connectivity  were  extracted  from  experimental  and  modeling  studies,  and 

included  the  number  of  connections  between  cell  types,  the  number  of  synapses  per  connection,  and  the 

spatial  distribution  of  these  synapses  in  the  dendritic  tree  for  each  pathway  [28,52,67,128–130] . The 

topology  of  these  connections  was  also  based  on  the  pattern  of  innervation  from  axonal  afferents  projecting 

into each nucleus. 

To  match  the  number  of  projections  to  and  from  TRN  observed  experimentally,  we  added  an  external 

ring  of  TRN  cells,  representing  the  adjacent  TRN  sectors  that  project  to  a given  thalamic  barreloid  [78] .

Having  this  ring  of  TRN  neurons  also  helps  minimize  the  border  effect,  which  is  common  in  networks  that 

use  position-based  connectivity  rules.  This  ring  comprises  106  (49%)  of  the  216  TRN  cells  driven  by  10  Hz 

spiking  activity  to  approximate  the  spiking  of  the  biophysical  TC  neurons  [52] , and  are  excluded  from  the 

angular tuning and spindle calculations. 

The  model  also  features  gap  junction  connectivity  between  TRN  neurons  based  on  overlapping 

dendritic  compartments.  We  devised  an  algorithm  to  detect  the  distance  between  neuronal  compartments 

33 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

to  create  the  pairwise  connections  based  on  a maximum  distance  threshold.  Following,  to  match 

experimental  observations,  we  adjusted  the  distance  threshold  (set  to  5 μm)  and  synaptic  pruning 

(maximum  of  20  gap  junction  connections  per  cell).  We  validated  the  model's  gap  junction  distribution 

profile against experimental data  [52,53]  (Fig 1F ). 

In  the  case  of  TC↔TRN  connectivity,  studies  are  inconclusive  about  the  arrangement  of  their  axonal 

projections  [19] . Therefore,  we  studied  different  intrathalamic  connectivity  configurations  in  this  pathway  to 

evaluate  its  influence  on  angular  tuning  responses  and  sleep  dynamics.  We  started  with  a uniform 

connectivity  between  TC↔TRN  (Fig  2),  and  later  compared  against  the  other  circuit  configurations  (Figs 

5-7 ). 

The  resulting  circuit  model  comprised  approximately  690k  synapses,  distributed  over  95k  cell-to-cell 

connections.  Specifically,  the  uniform  circuit  had  95,558  connections  and  691,162  synapses;  the  open-loop 

circuit,  91,939  connections  and  690,450  synapses;  the  closed-loop  circuit,  95,741  connections  and  691,363 

synapses;  and  all  circuits  share  the  same  3,432  gap  junctions.  Fig  1 compares  the  connectivity  of  the 

current  model  and  a non-barreloid  thalamic  model  [52]  based  on  the  ratio  of  projections  between  different 

pathways ( Fig 1E ) and the distribution of gap junctions  (Fig 1F ). 

Synaptic models 

All  chemical  synapses  included  short-term  plasticity  implemented  using  the  Tsodyks-Markram  model  [76] .

The  values  of  synaptic  conductance  and  short-term  plasticity  (Use,  Depression,  and  Facilitation)  for  each 

pathway  were  sampled  from  a truncated  normal  distribution  following  the  parameters  of  the  source  model 

(Fig  1D ) [52] . The  weights  of  these  connections  were  tuned  within  physiological  ranges  to  obtain  different 

circuit  dynamics.  Each  gap  junction  was  implemented  as  a 0.2  nS  bidirectional  conductance  between  the 

two compartments for all connections, following the source implementation ( Fig 1F ) [52] .

Brainstem whisker deflection model 

We  used  the  response  of  brainstem  neurons  during  passive  whisker  deflection  to  develop  a model  that 

simulates  realistic  spiking  activity  from  a brainstem  barrelette  encoding  whisker  deflection  inputs  to  the 

thalamus  [2] . This  brainstem  model  allows  the  selection  of  different  deflection  angles,  intervals,  and  total 

duration,  as  well  as  the  number  of  input  sources  representing  each  brainstem  neuron.  The  brainstem  model 

used  in  this  study  consists  of  180  artificial  neurons,  modeled  as  spike  generators,  each  representing  a 2° 

34 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

sector  in  polar  coordinates  [27,66] . The  spiking  activity  of  these  neurons  is  derived  from  PSTHs  recorded  in 

the  brainstem  and  thalamus  (Fig  3A ),  encoding  angular-tuned  information  by  scaling  each  neuron's 

response based on the angle of whisker deflection ( Fig 3B ) [2,27] .

The  PSTH  quantifies  the  spike  probability  for  a given  group  of  cells  over  time  (Fig  3A ).  During 

baseline,  the  spiking  activity  was  modeled  based  on  the  mean  and  standard  deviation  of  the  PSTH 

response.  We  fitted  the  ON  (deflection  onset)  and  OFF  (release)  transition  periods  of  the  deflection  events 

to  the  PSTH  data  using  triple  and  double  exponential  decay  functions,  respectively  (Fig  S3A ).  The  angular 

tuning  response  quantifies  the  direction  selectivity  of  the  cells  in  the  circuit  (Fig  3B ).  Experimentally,  it  is 

obtained  by  mapping  the  preferred  direction  of  each  recorded  cell,  which  is  used  as  a reference  angle, 

followed  by  measuring  the  overall  response  of  all  cells  to  deflections  in  all  different  directions  [2,27] . To 

replicate  that  tuning  in  our  model,  each  cell  is  assigned  a preferred  angle  of  maximal  responsiveness 

(0°–358°),  based  on  its  relative  position  along  the  y-axis.  During  baseline,  all  cells  have  a similar  firing  rate, 

extracted  from  the  PSTH  data.  During  a deflection  event,  this  firing  probability  is  scaled  based  on  the 

relative  distance  between  the  cell's  preferred  angle  and  the  deflection  angle.  Lastly,  the  probability  is 

rescaled  to  match  the  area  under  the  curve  before  angular  tuning  scaling  (Fig  S3B ).  This  rescaling 

preserves the angular tuning of the cells while reproducing the overall firing rate of the population. 

This implementation is demonstrated in Fig 3C and summarized by the following equation: 

Equation 2: 

𝑝 𝑛 

> (α)

(𝑡 ) =  𝑃 𝑆 (𝑡 ) ⋅ 𝑝 𝐴𝑇 (α) ⋅ 𝑟 (𝑡 )

Where: 

is  the  final  spike  probability  for  a given  cell  , which  encodes  the  angle  , during  a whisker 𝑝 𝑛 

> (α)

(𝑡 ) 𝑁  𝑛 

deflection  towards  angle  ; is  the  population  spike  probability,  the  same  for  all  cells  and α 𝑃 𝑆 (𝑡 )

time-dependent  (extracted  from  PSTH  data);  is  the  angular  tuning  probability  scaling  factor,  based 𝑝 𝐴𝑇 (α)

on  the  distance  ; is  a rescaling  factor  that  adjusts  the  area  under  the  spike  probability  curve ∣𝑛  − α∣  𝑟 (𝑡 )

after tuning. 

The values of  and  are defined as follows: 𝑝 𝐴𝑇 (𝑡 ) 𝑟 (𝑡 )

𝑝 𝐴𝑇 (α) = 𝑃 𝐴𝑇 (|𝑛  – α| ),  𝑟 (𝑡 ) = 3. 87  𝑓𝑜𝑟  𝑡 ₀ < 𝑡  < 𝑡 ₀ + 350  𝑚𝑠 

35 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

𝑝 𝐴𝑇 (α) = 1, 𝑟 (𝑡 ) = 1 𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒 

Where: 

is  the  function  that  determines  the  value  of  , which  is  a scaling  factor  used  to  modify 𝑃 𝐴𝑇 (|𝑛  – α| ) 𝑝 𝐴𝑇 (α)

the  spike  probability  based  on  the  distance  from  the  neuron  that  encodes  the  angle  to  the  target 𝑛 

deflection angle  .α

These  equations  are  used  to  create  a dataset  for  the  180  cells,  combining  the  PSTH  and  the  angular 

tuning  responses.  For  each  deflection  event,  the  probability  of  firing  changes  from  the  baseline  value  to  the 

ON  and  OFF  values,  which  are  scaled  based  on  the  distance  between  the  angle  encoded  by  a given  cell 

and  the  target  deflection  angle.  During  each  run  of  a 16-second  simulation  (Fig  S3C ),  the  thalamic  circuit 

received  14  deflection  events  of  250  ms  duration  for  the  same  angle.  We  ran  the  simulations  for  8 angles, 

starting  at  0°  and  spaced  by  45°  (Fig  3D-E ).  We  calculated  the  angular  tuning  response  for  each  population 

by  quantifying  the  spike  output  of  each  cell  during  a 20-ms  window  based  on  their  position  along  the  vertical 

axis  (Fig  S3C ).  The  spikes  were  grouped  based  on  the  preferred  direction  of  each  group  of  cells,  and  the 

spiking  output  of  each  direction  was  normalized  by  the  spike  output  of  the  target  angle  (Fig  S3C ).  Lastly,  we 

aligned  the  normalized  data  in  the  270°  direction  to  create  a combined  angular  tuning  map  (Fig  S3D ).  We 

verified  the  model's  fit  against  the  experimental  data  using  a Wilcoxon  signed-rank  test,  comparing  each 

value  along  the  angular  tuning  map  for  the  experimental  data  with  the  distribution  of  values  for  the  same 

angle  after  aligning  to  a common  direction.  We  found  no  statistical  difference  in  5 out  of  8 directions  (0°, 

45°,  225°,  270°,  and  315°),  which  included  the  angles  that  were  aligned  with  the  direction  of  the  deflection 

(Table  S5i ).  Additionally,  the  difference  in  distribution  of  spikes  between  the  non-significant  and  significant 

directions  was  only  3.47%,  showing  that  the  model  provides  a good  fit  to  the  dataset  (Table  S5ii ).  The  result 

was  a realistic  stimulation  dataset  that  mimicked  the  topological  information  encoded  in  the  brainstem  and 

was used to drive the activity in the thalamic populations. 

Corticothalamic feedback 

The  CT  feedback  in  the  model  was  implemented  as  818  artificial  neurons,  or  spike  generators,  firing  at  5

Hz,  consistent  with  experimental  estimates  [52,68,71] , and  was  used  to  characterize  CT  feedback  effects 

on thalamic sleep/wake and angular tuning responses. 

36 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

In  the  awake  state,  CT  inputs  consisted  of  5 Hz  activity  in  the  spike  generator  population.  For  the  CT 

Up/Down  modulation  in  the  sleep  state,  the  spike  generators  alternated  between  5 Hz  (500  ms)  and  1 Hz 

(1500  ms).  For  the  angular-tuned  CT  modulation  simulation,  either  0%,  10%,  25%,  50%,  or  100%  of  the  5

Hz  spike  generators  were  replaced  with  angular-tuned  spike  generators  and  evenly  distributed  across  the 

CT  population.  Angular  tuning  in  CT  neurons  was  implemented  using  the  brainstem  whisker  deflection 

model. 

Circuit-level modifications and model tuning 

Because  this  model  is  a reimplementation  of  an  already  tuned  circuit,  we  expected  that  as  we  rescaled  the 

size  of  the  circuit,  the  strength  of  some  synaptic  pathways  would  require  retuning.  After  an  initial  exploration 

in  the  parameter  space  of  RMP  values,  we  set  the  TC  neurons  to  -61  mV  and  the  TRN  neurons  to  -71  mV 

using  the  current-clamping  algorithm  and  added  the  Ornstein-Uhlenbeck  noise  [52] . With  the  circuit 

connected,  we  modified  the  conductance  values  for  all  pathways  using  a ‘weight’  variable  that  scales  the 

postsynaptic  potential  of  the  selected  pathways,  exploring  a range  of  values  between  0.1  and  5.0.  We  used 

the  firing  rate  of  the  TC  and  TRN  neurons  to  establish  a fixed  value  for  the  AMPA/NMDA  strength  for  the 

different  pathways  across  sleep  and  wake  states.  Our  goal  was  to  reproduce  the  oscillatory  activity  in  the 

spindle  frequency  range  characteristic  of  thalamo-cortical  circuits  in  sleep.  Following  that,  we  applied  the 

same  strategy  to  reproduce  the  wake  state  dynamics,  depolarizing  the  TC  and  TRN  RMPs  (-58  mV)  and 

rescaling  their  ionic  currents  and  GABA  strength,  following  literature  reports  [9,38,40–42,62] . All  changes 

are summarized in  Table 1 .

Model implementation and simulation 

This  model  was  developed,  simulated,  optimized  and  analyzed  using  Python  (version  3.9.7)  and  the 

NetPyNE  tool  (version  1.0.6)  [131] , an  open-source  framework  that  streamlines  the  modeling  of  large-scale 

biophysical  neural  circuits,  and  which  uses  the  NEURON  simulator  (version  7.8.2)  as  simulation  engine 

[132,133] .

Simulations  were  executed  on  a local  supercomputer  at  SUNY  Downstate,  and  each  full  run  of  the 

model  required  100.62  hours  to  complete,  running  on  8 machines  with  64  cores  each  (32,320  core  hours). 

In  these  conditions,  each  instance  of  the  model,  consisting  of  a 16-second  simulation,  required 

approximately 2h35’ to complete, and demanded approximately 128 GB of RAM. 

37 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Key resources table 

RESOURCE  SOURCE  IDENTIFIER 

Deposited data 

Thalamo-cortical  model  output  simulated 

data 

https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1688 

8006 

Software and algorithms 

Thalamo-cortical  model  and  data  analysis 

source code 

https://github.com/suny-downstate-

medical-center/thalamus_netpyne ;

This paper 

NetPyNE  http://netpyne.org  RRID: SCR_014758 

NEURON  https://neuron.yale.edu  RRID: SCR_017449 

snap  https://github.com/BlueBrain/snap  N/A 

Python  http://python.org  RRID: SCR_008394 

SciPy  https://scipy.org  RRID: SCR_008058 

# Acknowledgements 

This  work  was  supported  by  the  National  Institutes  of  Health  under  award  numbers  NIH  U24EB028998, 

NIMH  P50MH109429,  NYS  SCIRB  DOH01-C38328GG,  all  to  S.D.,  and  by  the  National  Institute  of  Mental 

Health under Award Number R56MH132637 to C.V. 

# Supporting information 

Supporting information can be found online along with the manuscript. 

# Author contributions 

Conceptualization,  J.V.S.M.,  S.D.-B.;  Data  curation,  J.V.S.M.,  F.S.B.,  Z.A.,  S.D.-B.;  Formal  analysis, 

J.V.S.M.,  F.S.B.,  Z.A.,  S.D.-B.;  Funding  acquisition,  S.D.-B.;  Investigation,  J.V.S.M.,  F.S.B.,  Z.A.,  S.R.C., 

C.V.,  S.D.-B.;  Methodology,  J.V.S.M.,  F.S.B.,  Z.A.,  S.R.C.,  C.V.,  S.D.-B.;  Project  administration,  S.D.-B.; 

Resources,  J.V.S.M.,  S.D.-B.;  Software,  J.V.S.M.,  F.S.B.,  Z.A.;  Supervision,  S.R.C.,  C.V.,  S.D.-B.; 

Validation,  J.V.S.M.,  F.S.B.,  Z.A.,  S.R.C.,  C.V.,  S.D.-B.;  Visualization,  J.V.S.M.;  Writing  - Original  Draft 

Preparation, J.V.S.M.; Writing - Review & Editing, J.V.S.M., F.S.B., Z.A., S.R.C., C.V., S.D.-B. 

# Declaration of interests 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

38 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# References 

1. Hartings JA, Temereanca S, Simons DJ. High responsiveness and direction sensitivity of neurons in the 

rat thalamic reticular nucleus to vibrissa deflections. J Neurophysiol. 2000;83:2791–801. 

2. Minnery BS, Bruno RM, Simons DJ. Response transformation and receptive-field synthesis in the 

lemniscal trigeminothalamic circuit. J Neurophysiol. 2003;90:1556–70. 

3. McAlonan K, Cavanaugh J, Wurtz RH. Attentional modulation of thalamic reticular neurons. J Neurosci. 

2006;26:4444–50. 

4. McAlonan K, Cavanaugh J, Wurtz RH. Guarding the gateway to cortex with attention in visual thalamus. 

Nature. 2008;456:391–4. 

5. Bosch-Bouju C, Hyland BI, Parr-Brownlie LC. Motor thalamus integration of cortical, cerebellar and basal 

ganglia information: implications for normal and parkinsonian conditions. Front Comput Neurosci. 

2013;7:163. 

6. Gent TC, Bassetti CLA, Adamantidis AR. Sleep-wake control and the thalamus. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 

2018;52:188–97. 

7. Steriade M, Timofeev I, Grenier F. Natural waking and sleep states: a view from inside neocortical 

neurons. J Neurophysiol. 2001;85:1969–85. 

8. McCormick DA, Bal T. Sleep and arousal: thalamocortical mechanisms. Annu Rev Neurosci. 

1997;20:185–215. 

9. Krishnan GP, Chauvette S, Shamie I, Soltani S, Timofeev I, Cash SS, et al. Cellular and neurochemical 

basis of sleep stages in the thalamocortical network. Elife [Internet]. 2016;5. Available from: 

http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.18607 

10. Walker MP, Stickgold R. Sleep-dependent learning and memory consolidation. Neuron. 

2004;44:121–33. 

11. Diekelmann S, Born J. The memory function of sleep. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2010;11:114–26. 

12. Feldman DE. Synaptic mechanisms for plasticity in neocortex. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2009;32:33–55. 

13. Yang G, Lai CSW, Cichon J, Ma L, Li W, Gan W-B. Sleep promotes branch-specific formation of 

dendritic spines after learning. Science. 2014;344:1173–8. 

14. Lam Y-W, Sherman SM. Mapping by laser photostimulation of connections between the thalamic 

reticular and ventral posterior lateral nuclei in the rat. J Neurophysiol. 2005;94:2472–83. 

15. Lam Y-W, Nelson CS, Sherman SM. Mapping of the functional interconnections between thalamic 

reticular neurons using photostimulation. J Neurophysiol. 2006;96:2593–600. 

16. Lam Y-W, Sherman SM. Different topography of the reticulothalmic inputs to first- and higher-order 

somatosensory thalamic relays revealed using photostimulation. J Neurophysiol. 2007;98:2903–9. 

17. Lam Y-W, Sherman SM. Functional organization of the somatosensory cortical layer 6 feedback to the 

thalamus. Cereb Cortex. 2010;20:13–24. 

18. Lam Y-W, Sherman SM. Functional organization of the thalamic input to the thalamic reticular nucleus. 

J Neurosci. 2011;31:6791–9. 

19. Halassa MM, Acsády L. Thalamic Inhibition: Diverse Sources, Diverse Scales. Trends Neurosci. 

2016;39:680–93. 

20. Adibi M. Whisker-Mediated Touch System in Rodents: From Neuron to Behavior. Front Syst Neurosci. 

39 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2019;13:40. 

21. Woolsey TA, Van der Loos H. The structural organization of layer IV in the somatosensory region (SI) of 

mouse cerebral cortex. The description of a cortical field composed of discrete cytoarchitectonic units. Brain 

Res. 1970;17:205–42. 

22. Fox K, Woolsey T. Barrel Cortex. Cambridge University Press; 2008. 

23. Van Der Loos H. Barreloids in mouse somatosensory thalamus. Neurosci Lett. 1976;2:1–6. 

24. Ma PM. The barrelettes--architectonic vibrissal representations in the brainstem trigeminal complex of 

the mouse. I. Normal structural organization. J Comp Neurol. 1991;309:161–99. 

25. Land PW, Buffer SA Jr, Yaskosky JD. Barreloids in adult rat thalamus: three-dimensional architecture 

and relationship to somatosensory cortical barrels. J Comp Neurol. 1995;355:573–88. 

26. Petersen CCH. The functional organization of the barrel cortex. Neuron. 2007;56:339–55. 

27. Timofeeva E, Mérette C, Emond C, Lavallée P, Deschênes M. A map of angular tuning preference in 

thalamic barreloids. J Neurosci. 2003;23:10717–23. 

28. Takeuchi Y, Osaki H, Yagasaki Y, Katayama Y, Miyata M. Afferent Fiber Remodeling in the 

Somatosensory Thalamus of Mice as a Neural Basis of Somatotopic Reorganization in the Brain and 

Ectopic Mechanical Hypersensitivity after Peripheral Sensory Nerve Injury. eNeuro [Internet]. 2017;4. 

Available from:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1523/ENEURO.0345-16.2017 

29. Wilent WB, Contreras D. Stimulus-dependent changes in spike threshold enhance feature selectivity in 

rat barrel cortex neurons. J Neurosci. 2005;25:2983–91. 

30. Pauzin FP, Schwarz N, Krieger P. Activation of Corticothalamic Layer 6 Cells Decreases Angular Tuning 

in Mouse Barrel Cortex. Front Neural Circuits. 2019;13:67. 

31. Kremer Y, Léger J-F, Goodman D, Brette R, Bourdieu L. Late emergence of the vibrissa direction 

selectivity map in the rat barrel cortex. J Neurosci. 2011;31:10689–700. 

32. Destexhe, Sejnowski TJ. Thalamocortical Assemblies: How Ion Channels, Single Neurons, Large-scale 

Networks Organize Sleep Oscillations. USA: Oxford University Press; 2001. 

33. Llinás R, Jahnsen H. Electrophysiology of mammalian thalamic neurones in vitro. Nature. 

1982;297:406–8. 

34. Jahnsen H, Llinás R. Electrophysiological properties of guinea-pig thalamic neurones: an in vitro study. 

J Physiol. 1984;349:205–26. 

35. Jahnsen H, Llinás R. Ionic basis for the electro-responsiveness and oscillatory properties of guinea-pig 

thalamic neurones in vitro. J Physiol. 1984;349:227–47. 

36. Huguenard JR. Low-threshold calcium currents in central nervous system neurons. Annu Rev Physiol. 

1996;58:329–48. 

37. Crunelli V, Lightowler S, Pollard CE. A T-type Ca2+ current underlies low-threshold Ca2+ potentials in 

cells of the cat and rat lateral geniculate nucleus. J Physiol. 1989;413:543–61. 

38. Halassa MM. The Thalamus. Cambridge University Press; 2022. 

39. Castro-Alamancos MA. Properties of primary sensory (lemniscal) synapses in the ventrobasal thalamus 

and the relay of high-frequency sensory inputs. J Neurophysiol. 2002;87:946–53. 

40. Cueni L, Canepari M, Luján R, Emmenegger Y, Watanabe M, Bond CT, et al. T-type Ca2+ channels, 

SK2 channels and SERCAs gate sleep-related oscillations in thalamic dendrites. Nat Neurosci. 

2008;11:683–92. 

40 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

41. Kékesi KA, Dobolyi A, Salfay O, Nyitrai G, Juhász G. Slow wave sleep is accompanied by release of 

certain amino acids in the thalamus of cats. Neuroreport. 1997;8:1183–6. 

42. Vanini G, Lydic R, Baghdoyan HA. GABA-to-ACh ratio in basal forebrain and cerebral cortex varies 

significantly during sleep. Sleep. 2012;35:1325–34. 

43. Shepherd GMG, Yamawaki N. Untangling the cortico-thalamo-cortical loop: cellular pieces of a knotty 

circuit puzzle. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2021;22:389–406. 

44. Crandall SR, Cruikshank SJ, Connors BW. A corticothalamic switch: controlling the thalamus with 

dynamic synapses. Neuron. 2015;86:768–82. 

45. Hirai D, Nakamura KC, Shibata K-I, Tanaka T, Hioki H, Kaneko T, et al. Shaping somatosensory 

responses in awake rats: cortical modulation of thalamic neurons. Brain Struct Funct. 2018;223:851–72. 

46. Constantinople CM, Bruno RM. Deep cortical layers are activated directly by thalamus. Science. 

2013;340:1591–4. 

47. Briggs F, Usrey WM. A fast, reciprocal pathway between the lateral geniculate nucleus and visual cortex 

in the macaque monkey. J Neurosci. 2007;27:5431–6. 

48. Steriade M, McCormick DA, Sejnowski TJ. Thalamocortical oscillations in the sleeping and aroused 

brain. Science. 1993;262:679–85. 

49. Timofeev I. Disfacilitation and active inhibition in the neocortex during the natural sleep-wake cycle: An 

intracellular study. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001;98:1924–9. 

50. Simpson JA, Fitch W. Arousal, attention and consciousness. Applied Neurophysiology. Elsevier; 1988. 

p. 137–46. 

51. Peyrache A, Battaglia FP, Destexhe A. Inhibition recruitment in prefrontal cortex during sleep spindles 

and gating of hippocampal inputs. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011;108:17207–12. 

52. Iavarone E, Simko J, Shi Y, Bertschy M, García-Amado M, Litvak P, et al. Thalamic control of sensory 

processing and spindles in a biophysical somatosensory thalamoreticular circuit model of wakefulness and 

sleep. Cell Rep [Internet]. 2023 [cited 2023 Mar 2];42. Available from: 

http://www.cell.com/article/S2211124723002115/abstract 

53. Lee S-C, Patrick SL, Richardson KA, Connors BW. Two functionally distinct networks of gap 

junction-coupled inhibitory neurons in the thalamic reticular nucleus. J Neurosci. 2014;34:13170–82. 

54. Iavarone E, Yi J, Shi Y, Zandt B-J, O’Reilly C, Van Geit W, et al. Experimentally-constrained biophysical 

models of tonic and burst firing modes in thalamocortical neurons. PLoS Comput Biol. 2019;15:e1006753. 

55. Petersen CCH. Sensorimotor processing in the rodent barrel cortex. Nat Rev Neurosci. 

2019;20:533–46. 

56. Bosman LWJ, Houweling AR, Owens CB, Tanke N, Shevchouk OT, Rahmati N, et al. Anatomical 

pathways involved in generating and sensing rhythmic whisker movements. Front Integr Neurosci. 

2011;5:53. 

57. Bechara A, Laumonnerie C, Vilain N, Kratochwil CF, Cankovic V, Maiorano NA, et al. Hoxa2 Selects 

Barrelette Neuron Identity and Connectivity in the Mouse Somatosensory Brainstem. Cell Rep. 

2015;13:783–97. 

58. Sherman SM. Functioning of Circuits Connecting Thalamus and Cortex. Compr Physiol. 

2017;7:713–39. 

59. Landisman CE, Long MA, Beierlein M, Deans MR, Paul DL, Connors BW. Electrical synapses in the 

thalamic reticular nucleus. J Neurosci. 2002;22:1002–9. 

60. Usrey WM, Sherman SM. Exploring Thalamocortical Interactions: Circuitry for Sensation, Action, and 

41 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Cognition. Oxford University Press; 2021. 

61. Wilson JR, Friedlander MJ, Sherman SM. Fine structural morphology of identified X- and Y-cells in the 

cat’s lateral geniculate nucleus. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 1984;221:411–36. 

62. McCormick DA. Neurotransmitter actions in the thalamus and cerebral cortex and their role in 

neuromodulation of thalamocortical activity. Prog Neurobiol. 1992;39:337–88. 

63. Destexhe A, Bal T, McCormick DA, Sejnowski TJ. Ionic mechanisms underlying synchronized 

oscillations and propagating waves in a model of ferret thalamic slices. J Neurophysiol. 1996;76:2049–70. 

64. Parri HR, Crunelli V. Sodium current in rat and cat thalamocortical neurons: role of a non-inactivating 

component in tonic and burst firing. J Neurosci. 1998;18:854–67. 

65. Fransén E, Tigerholm J. Role of A-type potassium currents in excitability, network synchronicity, and 

epilepsy. Hippocampus. 2010;20:877–87. 

66. Henderson TA, Jacquin MF. What Makes Subcortical Barrels? In: Jones EG, Diamond IT, editors. The 

Barrel Cortex of Rodents. Boston, MA: Springer US; 1995. p. 123–87. 

67. Deschênes M, Timofeeva E, Lavallée P. The relay of high-frequency sensory signals in the 

Whisker-to-barreloid pathway. J Neurosci. 2003;23:6778–87. 

68. Crandall SR, Patrick SL, Cruikshank SJ, Connors BW. Infrabarrels Are Layer 6 Circuit Modules in the 

Barrel Cortex that Link Long-Range Inputs and Outputs. Cell Rep. 2017;21:3065–78. 

69. Brown JW, Taheri A, Kenyon RV, Berger-Wolf TY, Llano DA. Signal Propagation via Open-Loop 

Intrathalamic Architectures: A Computational Model. eNeuro [Internet]. 2020;7. Available from: 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1523/ENEURO.0441-19.2020 

70. Willis AM, Slater BJ, Gribkova ED, Llano DA. Open-loop organization of thalamic reticular nucleus and 

dorsal thalamus: a computational model. J Neurophysiol. 2015;114:2353–67. 

71. Dash S, Autio DM, Crandall SR. State-dependent modulation of activity in distinct layer 6 

corticothalamic neurons in barrel cortex of awake mice. J Neurosci. 2022;42:6551–65. 

72. Connelly WM, Crunelli V, Errington AC. The Global Spike: Conserved Dendritic Properties Enable 

Unique Ca2+ Spike Generation in Low-Threshold Spiking Neurons. J Neurosci. 2015;35:15505–22. 

73. Connelly WM, Crunelli V, Errington AC. Passive Synaptic Normalization and Input 

Synchrony-Dependent Amplification of Cortical Feedback in Thalamocortical Neuron Dendrites. J Neurosci. 

2016;36:3735–54. 

74. Mainen ZF, Sejnowski TJ. Influence of dendritic structure on firing pattern in model neocortical neurons. 

Nature. 1996;382:363–6. 

75. Liu XB, Honda CN, Jones EG. Distribution of four types of synapse on physiologically identified relay 

neurons in the ventral posterior thalamic nucleus of the cat. J Comp Neurol. 1995;352:69–91. 

76. Tsodyks MV, Markram H. The neural code between neocortical pyramidal neurons depends on 

neurotransmitter release probability. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997;94:719–23. 

77. Bresee CS, Belli HM, Luo Y, Hartmann MJZ. Comparative morphology of the whiskers and faces of 

mice (Mus musculus) and rats (Rattus norvegicus). J Exp Biol. 2023;226:jeb245597. 

78. Temereanca S, Simons DJ. Functional topography of corticothalamic feedback enhances thalamic 

spatial response tuning in the somatosensory whisker/barrel system. Neuron. 2004;41:639–51. 

79. Pinault D, Deschênes M. Anatomical evidence for a mechanism of lateral inhibition in the rat thalamus: 

Thalamic lateral inhibition. Eur J Neurosci. 1998;10:3462–9. 

80. Pinault D, Deschênes M. Projection and innervation patterns of individual thalamic reticular axons in the 

42 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

thalamus of the adult rat: a three-dimensional, graphic, and morphometric analysis. J Comp Neurol. 

1998;391:180–203. 

81. Lee S-C, Cruikshank SJ, Connors BW. Electrical and chemical synapses between relay neurons in 

developing thalamus: Electrical and chemical synapses of developing thalamic relay cells. J Physiol. 

2010;588:2403–15. 

82. Lagerström MC, Rabe N, Haitina T, Kalnina I, Hellström AR, Klovins J, et al. The evolutionary history 

and tissue mapping of GPR123: specific CNS expression pattern predominantly in thalamic nuclei and 

regions containing large pyramidal cells. J Neurochem. 2007;100:1129–42. 

83. Salt TE, Jones HE, Andolina IM, Copeland CS, Clements JTC, Knoflach F, et al. Potentiation of sensory 

responses in ventrobasal thalamus in vivo via selective modulation of mGlu1 receptors with a positive 

allosteric modulator. Neuropharmacology. 2012;62:1695–9. 

84. Copeland CS, Wall TM, Sims RE, Neale SA, Nisenbaum E, Parri HR, et al. Astrocytes modulate 

thalamic sensory processing via mGlu2 receptor activation. Neuropharmacology. 2017;121:100–10. 

85. Mease RA, Krieger P, Groh A. Cortical control of adaptation and sensory relay mode in the thalamus. 

Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014;111:6798–803. 

86. Krahe R, Gabbiani F. Burst firing in sensory systems. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2004;5:13–23. 

87. Knudsen EI, du Lac S, Esterly SD. Computational maps in the brain. Annu Rev Neurosci. 

1987;10:41–65. 

88. Kondo S, Ohki K. Laminar differences in the orientation selectivity of geniculate afferents in mouse 

primary visual cortex. Nat Neurosci. 2016;19:316–9. 

89. Sun W, Tan Z, Mensh BD, Ji N. Thalamus provides layer 4 of primary visual cortex with orientation- and 

direction-tuned inputs. Nat Neurosci. 2016;19:308–15. 

90. Salzman CD, Britten KH, Newsome WT. Cortical microstimulation influences perceptual judgements of 

motion direction. Nature. 1990;346:174–7. 

91. Barlow HB, Hill RM. Selective sensitivity to direction of movement in ganglion cells of the rabbit retina. 

Science. 1963;139:412–4. 

92. Rasmussen R, Yonehara K. Contributions of retinal direction selectivity to central visual processing. 

Curr Biol. 2020;30:R897–903. 

93. Kato HK, Asinof SK, Isaacson JS. Network-level control of frequency tuning in auditory cortex. Neuron. 

2017;95:412–23.e4. 

94. Kitzes L. Binaural interactions shape binaural response structures and frequency response functions in 

primary auditory cortex. Hear Res. 2008;238:68–76. 

95. Stecker GC. Auditory cortex: Representing sound locations during active sensing. Curr Biol. 

2021;31:R1042–4. 

96. Tutunculer B, Foffani G, Himes BT, Moxon KA. Structure of the excitatory receptive fields of 

infragranular forelimb neurons in the rat primary somatosensory cortex responding to touch. Cereb Cortex. 

2006;16:791–810. 

97. Kaas JH. Topographic maps are fundamental to sensory processing. Brain Res Bull. 1997;44:107–12. 

98. Chang L, Tsao DY. The code for facial identity in the primate brain. Cell. 2017;169:1013–28.e14. 

99. Engel AK, Fries P, Singer W. Dynamic predictions: oscillations and synchrony in top-down processing. 

Nat Rev Neurosci. 2001;2:704–16. 

100. Carandini M, Heeger DJ. Normalization as a canonical neural computation. Nat Rev Neurosci. 

43 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2011;13:51–62. 

101. Fries P. Rhythms for Cognition: Communication through Coherence. Neuron. 2015;88:220–35. 

102. Pouget A, Dayan P, Zemel R. Information processing with population codes. Nat Rev Neurosci. 

2000;1:125–32. 

103. Temereanca S, Simons DJ. Local field potentials and the encoding of whisker deflections by 

population firing synchrony in thalamic barreloids. J Neurophysiol. 2003;89:2137–45. 

104. Llinás R, Yarom Y. Electrophysiology of mammalian inferior olivary neurones in vitro. Different types of 

voltage-dependent ionic conductances. J Physiol. 1981;315:549–67. 

105. Timofeev I, Contreras D, Steriade M. Synaptic responsiveness of cortical and thalamic neurones 

during various phases of slow sleep oscillation in cat. J Physiol. 1996;494 ( Pt 1):265–78. 

106. Varela C, Wilson MA. mPFC spindle cycles organize sparse thalamic activation and recently active 

CA1 cells during non-REM sleep. Elife [Internet]. 2020 [cited 2025 May 5];9. Available from: 

http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.48881 

107. Contreras D, Destexhe A, Sejnowski TJ, Steriade M. Control of spatiotemporal coherence of a 

thalamic oscillation by corticothalamic feedback. Science. 1996;274:771–4. 

108. Briggs F, Usrey WM. Emerging views of corticothalamic function. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2008;18:403–7. 

109. Halassa MM, Sherman SM. Thalamocortical Circuit Motifs: A General Framework. Neuron. 

2019;103:762–70. 

110. Varela C, Moreira JVS, Kocaoglu B, Dura-Bernal S, Ahmad S. A mechanism for deviance detection 

and contextual routing in the thalamus: a review and theoretical proposal. Front Neurosci. 

2024;18:1359180. 

111. Andermann ML, Moore CI. A somatotopic map of vibrissa motion direction within a barrel column. Nat 

Neurosci. 2006;9:543–51. 

112. Pinault D. The thalamic reticular nucleus: structure, function and concept. Brain Res Brain Res Rev. 

2004;46:1–31. 

113. Ansorge J, Manahan-Vaughan D. Somatosensory control of thalamic relay neurons is regulated by two 

distinct layer 6 feedback systems. iScience. 2026;29:114427. 

114. Kirchgessner MA, Franklin AD, Callaway EM. Context-dependent and dynamic functional influence of 

corticothalamic pathways to first- and higher-order visual thalamus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 

2020;117:13066–77. 

115. Li L, Ebner FF. Cortical modulation of spatial and angular tuning maps in the rat thalamus. J Neurosci. 

2007;27:167–79. 

116. Crick F. Function of the thalamic reticular complex: the searchlight hypothesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S 

A. 1984;81:4586–90. 

117. McCormick DA, Huguenard JR. A model of the electrophysiological properties of thalamocortical relay 

neurons. J Neurophysiol. 1992;68:1384–400. 

118. Deschênes M, Veinante P, Zhang ZW. The organization of corticothalamic projections: reciprocity 

versus parity. Brain Res Brain Res Rev. 1998;28:286–308. 

119. Bourassa J, Pinault D, Deschênes M. Corticothalamic projections from the cortical barrel field to the 

somatosensory thalamus in rats: a single-fibre study using biocytin as an anterograde tracer. Eur J 

Neurosci. 1995;7:19–30. 

120. Rimehaug AE, Stasik AJ, Hagen E, Billeh YN, Siegle JH, Dai K, et al. Uncovering circuit mechanisms 

44 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted May 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.18.670921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

of current sinks and sources with biophysical simulations of primary visual cortex. Elife [Internet]. 2023 

[cited 2026 Apr 19];12. Available from:  http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.87169 

121. Borges FS, Moreira JVS, Takarabe LM, Lytton WW, Dura-Bernal S. Large-scale biophysically detailed 

model of somatosensory thalamocortical circuits in NetPyNE. Front Neuroinform. 2022;16:884245. 

122. Dura-Bernal S, Neymotin SA, Suter BA, Dacre J, Moreira JVS, Urdapilleta E, et al. Multiscale model of 

primary motor cortex circuits predicts in vivo cell-type-specific, behavioral state-dependent dynamics. Cell 

Rep. 2023;42:112574. 

123. Dura-Bernal S, Griffith EY, Barczak A, O’Connell MN, McGinnis T, Moreira JVS, et al. Data-driven 

multiscale model of macaque auditory thalamocortical circuits reproduces in vivo dynamics. Cell Rep. 

2023;42:113378. 

124. Crabtree JW, Collingridge GL, Isaac JT. A new intrathalamic pathway linking modality-related nuclei in 

the dorsal thalamus. Nat Neurosci. 1998;1:389–94. 

125. Crabtree JW, Isaac JTR. New intrathalamic pathways allowing modality-related and cross-modality 

switching in the dorsal thalamus. J Neurosci. 2002;22:8754–61. 

126. Claus L, Philippot C, Griemsmann S, Timmermann A, Jabs R, Henneberger C, et al. Barreloid Borders 

and Neuronal Activity Shape Panglial Gap Junction-Coupled Networks in the Mouse Thalamus. Cereb 

Cortex. 2018;28:213–22. 

127. Erö C, Gewaltig M-O, Keller D, Markram H. A Cell Atlas for the Mouse Brain. Front Neuroinform. 

2018;12:84. 

128. Çavdar S, Hacioğlu H, Şirvanci S, Keskinöz E, Onat F. Synaptic organization of the rat thalamus: a 

quantitative study. Neurol Sci. 2011;32:1047–56. 

129. Van Horn SC, Sherman SM. Fewer driver synapses in higher order than in first order thalamic relays. 

Neuroscience. 2007;146:463–70. 

130. Adams P, Guillery RW, Sherman SM, Sillito AM, Jones EG. Thalamic circuitry and thalamocortical 

synchrony. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2002;357:1659–73. 

131. Dura-Bernal S, Suter BA, Gleeson P, Cantarelli M, Quintana A, Rodriguez F, et al. NetPyNE, a tool for 

data-driven multiscale modeling of brain circuits. Elife. 2019;8:e44494. 

132. Hines ML, Carnevale NT. The NEURON simulation environment. Neural Comput. 1997;9:1179–209. 

133. Awile O, Kumbhar P, Cornu N, Dura-Bernal S, King JG, Lupton O, et al. Modernizing the NEURON 

Simulator for Sustainability, Portability, and Performance. Front Neuroinform. 2022;16:884046. 

45