Title: Persistent light-induced reduction of neuronal excitability in cortical neurons

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615v3.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
1

# Persistent light -induced reduction of neuronal excitability in 

# cortical neurons 

Lightning , Anistasha 1 Di Rocco , Federico  2,3  ; Guenot , Marc  1, 4 ; Kuczewski  , Nicola 1

Abstract 

Visible light is widely used in neuroscience, yet its direct effects on neuronal activity in the 

absence of optogenetic manipulation remain incompletely understood. Here, we investigated 

whether light stimulation can induce sustained changes in neuronal ex citability. Using ex vivo 

electrophysiological recordings, we show that repeated pulses of blue light (5 s, 430 –495 nm, 

19 mW) produce a robust and persistent reduction in evoked firing activity in cortical neurons 

from both male and female mice, with an a verage decrease of ~60% relative to baseline. This 

inhibitory effect persisted for more than 20 minutes following stimulation and was associated 

with changes in both passive membrane properties and active ion channel conductance. In 

human cortical neurons,  responses were more heterogeneous. While a subset of neurons 

exhibited similar inhibitory effects, others showed increased excitability, with this response 

occurring more frequently in neurons from female patients, suggesting a potential sex -

dependent eff ect. In addition, a transient depolarizing response to light was observed in a 

minority of human neurons but not in mice. These findings indicate that visible light, 

independently of exogenous opsins, can induce long -lasting modulation of neuronal activity 

without evidence of acute cytotoxicity under the conditions tested. This raises the possibility 

that  visible  light may provide a previously underappreciated, opsin -independent mechanism for 

modulating neuronal activity , with potential relevance for  disorders characterized by neuronal 

hyperexcitability. We outline a framework for future investigations, including validation in 

human systems, in vivo studies, optimization of stimulation parameters, and assessment of 

therapeutic potential in pathological  models. 

1-Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, CNRS, INSERM, Centre de Recherche en 

Neurosciences de Lyon CRNL U1028 UMR5292, NEUROPOP NEUROPAIN F -69500, 

Bron, France. 

2- Université de Lyon. 

3-Woman -Mother -Child Hospital, 59 Bd Pinel, 69500 Bron, France. 

4- Department of Functional Neurosurgery, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon,  France 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2

Correspond ence to : Nicola Kuczewski ,.

Centre de Recherche en Neurosciences de Lyon CRNL U1028 UMR5292, F -69500, Bron, 

France. 

E-mail : nicola.kuczewski@univ -lyon1.fr 

Running  title:  Light  inhibition  of  neuronal  activity 

Keywords:  cortical  neurons; patch  clamp; firing activity ; action potential currents ; photostimulation; 

mice and human. 

Abbreviations:  ACSF = artificial cerebrospinal  fluid ; AP  = action  potential; LED =Light‑Emitting 

Diode  ; Rm= membrane resistance ; VG= voltage gated;  Vm = membrane  potential ; Vrest  =

average resting membrane potential . RA =access resistance 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

# Introduction 

Although pharmacological treatment remains the primary therapeutic approach for managing 

brain pathologies  arising from neuronal hyperexcitability , this strategy has several limitations, 

including:  a)  low specificity in targeting specific brain regions,  b)  challenges in crossing the 

blood -brain barrier,  c)  peripheral side effects resulting from systemic administration, and  d)  the 

development of tolerance and dependency with prolonged use  1,2 . To address these limitations, 

non -pharmacological therapeutic tools have been developed. These approaches primarily focus 

on targeted interventions aimed at locally modifying brain activity. Examples include Deep 

Brain Stimulation  (DBS) 3, Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation 4, and Ultrasound 

Neuromodulation  5. These tools are now widely used in both preclinical and clinical research, 

and in specific cases —such as DBS for Parkinson's disease —they have become cornerstone 

therapies for managing advanced stages of the  disease  in carefully selected patients  6. A lesser -

known approach to locally modifying brain function is the use of near -infrared (NIR) light 

stimulation. This technique, termed brain  photobiomodulation , appears to rely on the ability of 

NIR light to influence neuronal metabolism by reducing oxidative stress, modulating 

inflammatory responses, and promoting neurogenesis 7,8 . Recent studies have also demonstrated 

that the mammalian brain is sensitive to light stimulation within the visible spectrum. 

Specifically, a decrease in neuronal  firing activity has been observed in various central nervous 

system (CNS) neuron types when stimulated in the yellow -blue light range  9–12 . This effect is 

typically transient, with neuronal activity recovering  shortly  after the light is switched off. 

Futher, the inhibition  appears to coincide with a light -induced hyperpolarizing membrane 

current and modifications in action potential (AP) amplitude and latency  9,12 . The underlying 

mechanisms responsible for these light -induced effects on neuronal activity remain under 

investigation  but  experimental evidence suggests that they result from tissue heating produced 

by the light, which alters the gating properties and/or permeability of  cellular  membrane 

channels, thereby affecting neuronal electrical activity  9,10,12 –14 . The magnitude of  the  visible 

light -induced neuronal inhibition  effect  increases with both light power and stimulation 

duration  9,13,14 . Interestingly, preliminary results suggest that repeated continuous blue light 

pulses of relatively long duration (5 –10 s) can induce a sustained inhibition of neuronal firing 

in mitral cells of the olfactory bulb, persisting for several minutes beyond t he stimulation period 

(see  supplementary  figure in 9). If confirmed and extended to other neuronal types, the long -

lasting inhibition of neuronal activity produced by visible light could open new therapeutic 

possibilities for treating  the  neuronal hyperexcitability associated with several neurological 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

disorders in humans.  In the present report we investigate this possibility by looking at  the effect 

produced by 5s  blue light (19  mW  power ) stimulation on  the  electrophysiological activity  of 

both mouse and human cortical neurons. 

# Material  and  methods 

## Animals. 

Male  and female  C57Bl6/J mice ( Janvier Laboratories , France) aged between 60 and 90 days 

were used.  All procedures were in accordance with European Union recommendations for 

animal experimentation  (2010/63/UE). Mice were housed in groups of up to  six  in standard 

laboratory cages and were kept on a 12 -hour light/dark cycle (at a constant temperature of 22°C) 

with food and water  ad libitum .

## Human  Tissue. 

For the investigation of human cortical neurons, we obtained living cortical tissue in 

collaboration with surgeons from two hospitals in Bron, Auvergne -Rhône -Alpes, France. 

Tissue samples were collected from patients (aged 3 –54 years) undergoing surgical t reatment 

for drug -resistant epilepsy or tumor removal  surgery . All patients, or their legal guardians when 

applicable, provided informed consent for the use of their excised cortical tissue in research. 

The tissue was sourced exclusively from cortical area s that were already being removed as part 

of the standard surgical procedure. 

## Optical  stimulation. 

The light stimulation applied in this study was single -photon (1P) visible blue light stimulation, 

peaked at 470 nm (emission spectrum: 430 –495 nm). Stimulation was delivered using a Dual 

Port OptoLED system (CAIRN, UK) with a 495 nm dichroic mirror , with  a power output of 19 

mW measured at the x40 objective. Due to the presence of artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF), 

power loss at the working distance (2.5 mm from the objective) was empirically estimated at 

13%. The average power density in the tissue w as estimated by dividing the power at the 

working distance by the empirically measured illumination area (~7 mm²). After accounting for 

the 13% power loss, the final estimated average power density in the tissue was ~2.4 mW/mm² 

for the 19 mW blue LED. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

## Slice  preparation  of  mouse  cortical  neurons. 

Mice were anaesthetized with an intra -peritoneal injection of ketamine (50 mg/ml) and 

decapitated. The head was  quickly immersed in ice -cold (2 -4°C) artificial cerebrospinal fluid 

(Cut  ACSF)  with  the following composition: 125 mM NaCl, 4 mM KCl, 25 mM NaHCO3, 0.5 

mM CaCl 2, 1.25 mM NaH 2PO 4, 7 mM MgCl 2 and  5.5  mM  (1g/L)  glucose (pH = 7.4 ,

oxygenated with 95 % O 2/5 % CO 2). The osmolarity  of the solution  was adjusted to  between 

300 and  320 mOsm with sucrose.  The brain was removed from the dissected animal and the 

cerebellum , midbrain , olfactory bulb, and approximately 1  – 2 mm of the anterior cerebral 

cortex  were removed using  an Unger 4 cm  razor blade in order to create a flat plane for 

adherence to the vibratome chamber  used in the  preparation of the slices . Cortical coronal slices 

(400μm thick) were prepared with  the  vibratome (Leica)  and cut in half to divide the 

hemispheres approximately along the corpus collosum . Slices were then incubated in a recovery 

chamber at 30 ± 1°C using an ACSF solution with a composition similar to the Cut ACSF, 

except for changes to CaCl 2 and MgCl 2 concentrations ( 1.2  mM and  0.7  mM, respectively). 

## Slice  preparation  of  human  neurons .

Approximately  0.5 -2 cm³ of cortical tissue, containing both gray and white matter, was 

removed by the neurosurgeon and transferred to an oxygenated transport container filled with 

ice -cold (2 –4°C) Cut  ACSF solution  with the  same  chemical  composition  used  for mouse 

tissue . During transportation from the hospital to the research laboratory, the solution was 

continuously oxygenated (95% O₂, 5% CO₂) using a portable oxygen tank.  Upon arrival  at the 

laboratory , the tissue and Cut  ACSF were transferred to a glass Petri dish and  cut as needed to 

fit the vibratome chamber.  The delay between resection and slicing was between ten and twenty 

minutes . In most cases,  though  not always  possible , the tissue was sectioned to retain both gray 

and white matter, aiding in  the eventual orientation of the tissue beneath the  microscop e. Visual 

inspection of the neurons did not reveal any evident degradation compared with mouse tissue .

## Determination  of  light -induced  tissue  temperature  change 

Light induced temperature modification produced by LED stimulation was measured by 

placing the temperature probe connected to a ThermoClamp -1 device (Atomate Scientific) on 

cortical tissue beneath the microscope objective, which was held at the exact sam e distance as 

present in the electrophysiological experiments. The slices were stimulated with 19mW 

continuous blue light for 5s and the evolution of tissue temperature was recorded throughout .

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

## Electrophysiological  recordings .

Slices were transferred to a recording chamber mounted on an upright microscope and 

continuously perfused with oxygenated ACSF (2 -4 ml/min) at 36 ± 1°C. Neurons were 

visualized using a microscope (Zeiss axioscope) with a x40  objective (Zeiss Plan -

APOCHROMAT). Data were acquired with the amplifier RK 400 BioLogic at full sampling 

frequency of 25 kHz using a 12 -bit A/D -D/A converter (Digidata 1440A, Axon Instruments) 

and PClamp software (PClamp10, Axon Instruments).  Recordings were performed on cortical 

neuro ns from various regions and layers, displaying the morphological and electrophysiological 

characteristics of excitatory glutamatergic cells: pyramidal shape, high coefficient of variation 

of interspike intervals (ISI > 0.3), pronounced firing frequency ada ptation (median ISI of the 

last spike / first spike > 1.5), and long action potential duration (FWHM > 0.5 ms) . Patch -clamp 

whole -cell recordings were achieved with borosilicate pipettes having a resistance  5-9 MΩ and 

filled with: 126 mM K -gluconate, 5 mM  KCl, 10 mM HEPES, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM MgCl2, 2 

mM ATP -Na2, 0.3 mM GTP -Na3, and 10 mM phosphocreatine (pH = 7.3, 290 mOsm). 

## Determination  of  the  light  effect  on  the  evoked  firing  rate  of 

## cortical  neur ons. 

This procedure was used for both mouse and human  neurons. Cells were recorded in 

current -clamp mode at their resting membrane potential  except for one neuron where a small 

hyperpolarizing current was injected to suppress spontaneous activity . To program the protocol 

and ensure consistent stimulation timing, the procedure was divided into predefined sweeps 

(Supplementary  Fig  1).  Each electrophysiological sweep lasted 38 seconds. During each sweep, 

two consecutive 5 -second trains  (separated by a 15 second interval)  of action potentials were 

evoked using 5 -second depolarizing current. At the beginning of each sweep, a hyperpolarizing 

current s of  -0.1 nA (1 -second duration) was applied to assess membrane resistance (Rm). In 

the pre -light period, nine sweeps  (6 minutes in total)  were recorded per neuron as controls. This 

was followed by a light period consisting of either ten or six sweeps, during which a 5 -second 

continuous blue light stimulation (19 mW) was applied concurrently wit h the first depolarizing 

step (referred to as StimLED), but not during the second depolarizing step (referred to as 

StimCtr). Additionally, four seconds after the end of the second depolarizing step, neurons 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7

received an extra 1 -second pulse of continuous light to assess the effect of illumination on the 

resting membrane potential. Finally, a post -light period with a variable number of sweeps  (from 

20 to 42 minutes in total)  was recorded to evaluate the long -lasting effects of  light.  A custom 

Python script ( /https://osf.io/unj9k/ ) was used to calculate the temporal evolution of firing by 

normalizing the firing rate induced by the depolarizing steps to the median firing rate of the 

control period.  The effect of light stimulation on membrane potential was analyzed by 

subtracting the average membrane potential (Vm) during the 1 -second light stimulation at the 

end of the sweep from the average Vm in the 1 second preceding the light stimulation. 

Membrane resistance (Rm) was calculated in each sweep using Ohm’s law:  R=ΔV/ΔI  where ΔV 

was the difference between the membrane potential measured in the last 100 ms of the 

hyperpolarization and the membrane potential in the 200 ms preceding the hyperpolarizing  step .

## Determination  of  light  effect  on  the  currents  participating  in  the 

## action  potential  generation 

This procedure was applied only to mouse cortical neurons in voltage -clamp mode (see 

Supplementary  Fig  2). Neurons were held at  -70 mV. A voltage command was used to generate 

a fake action potential (AP) that mimicked the shape of  real  APs recorded in current -clamp 

configuration  having an amplitude of 78 mV (data from  Lightning  et al. , 2023a)  . This 

waveform was preceded by 10 repetitions of the same AP scaled by a factor of −0.1. These 

inverted  reduced APs (ranging from − 7.8  mV to +  0.4 mV) were  designed to elicit only passive 

membrane currents . The total passive current generated during the fake AP was calculated as 

the sum of the passive currents from the 10  inverted -reduced APs. This passive current was 

then subtracted from the total recorded current during AP generation, allowing for the isolation 

of the active current involved in AP generation.  This approach revealed an inward, putative Na⁺ 

and Ca²⁺ current associated with AP depolarization and an outward, putative K⁺ current 

associated with A P repolarization.  The control was established over  13  sweeps, followed by 6 

sweeps with LED stimulation and a 25 -minute post -led recovery period.  The  eventual 

modification of the recorded currents produced by the modification of the access resistance 

(RA) during the recording  was corrected by multiplying the current trace of each sweep by the 

t ratio ( RA first sweep/  RA recorded sweep) , the efficacy of this procedure to compensate  for the 

modification in amplitude and kinetics of the recorded current is illustrated in  supplementary 

Fig  2D . The fake action potential (AP) was preceded by a 1 -second hyperpolarizing step of  -5

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

mV, used to monitor membrane resistance. This resistance was  calculated in each sweep using 

Ohm’s law:  R=ΔV/ΔI where ΔV= -5mV and ΔI was the difference between the median current 

in the last 100 ms of the hyperpolarization and the median current in the 200 ms  preceding the 

step . RA was calculated as ΔV/ΔI A, where ΔI A is the difference between the peak of  the  transient 

current and the median current in the 200 ms  preceding  the step . The analysis was performed 

using custom scripts written in Python  (https://osf.io/unj9k/ ).

## Statistics :

The different biophysical parameters were compared across pre -light, light, and post -

light conditions using repeated measures ANOVA, followed by Holm post hoc comparisons. 

Correlations were assessed using Pearson's test. A 2×2 repeated measures ANOVA was 

employed to assess the light effect as a function of sex. A χ² test was used to compare 

proportions. For frequentist statistics, the α risk was set at 5%. The absence of an effect was 

assessed using the Bayes factor (BF₀₁), representing the likelihood of th e null hypothesis over 

the alternative hypothesis  15 . Statistical analysis was performed with JASP software (JASP 

Team, 2022) and is available at  : https://osf.io/rx5vs , https://osf.io/6jqye/  ,and 

https://osf.io/nf6g4 .

## Exclusion  criteria 

We excluded from analysis the following electrophysiological profiles: 

For the action potential firing analysis, cells were excluded when a consistent increase or 

decrease in AP frequency over time was visually detected across sweeps during the pre -light 

period.  Individual sweeps from a cell’s dataset were excluded if spontaneous firing activity 

occurring between current steps obscured the activity induced by the depolarizing steps . For 

the effect of light on Vm individual sweeps within a cell’s data  were  excluded when 

spontaneous action potential firing occurred during the 1s LED stimulation.  For  currents 

analysis , cells were excluded when  a consistent increase or decrease  of recorded current  over 

time was visually detected across sweeps during the pre -light period 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

# Results 

## Blue light produce s a long -lasting  reduction of  the  firing activity of 

## mouse cortical neurons 

To explore the impact of repetitive 5s blue LED stimulation at 19 mW on cortical 

neurons  from adult male mice , we conducted current clamp recordings following the protocol 

outlined in  Fig  1A.  A negative current step was employed to monitor membrane resistance 

(Rm) , followed by two depolarizing steps inducing firing activity. The first depolarizing step 

was correlated with LED stimulation during the light period.  Additionally, a test LED pulse 

was utilized to assess the acute modification of membrane potential by light (refer to 

Supplementary  Fig  1 for additional details).  As depicted in  Fig  1B, the LED caused a slight and 

temporary increase in tissue temperature of 1.8°  ± 0.5  C (tested on  separate slices) . Ten 

repetitions of LED stimulation resulted in a long -lasting decrease in firing activity  (39% ± 2 7%

of the pre -LED activity , p<0.01,  N=17 , Fig 1Ci ). Similar effects were observed when six 

repetitions of LED stimulation were applied  (Fig 1Cii,  37 ±  29  % of the pre -LED activity ,

p= 0.015 , N=6) . Extended recording time in these experiments highlighted the persistence of the 

firing decrease . An overall reduction to 38% ± 23% of the pre -LED activity was observed 

between 10 and 16 minutes after the initiation of the first LED stimulation (p  <0.00 1; N = 23, 

see Fig. 1Ciii).  However, no significant change in firing activity was observed when  only a 

single light pulse was delivered (Fig. 1C iv, p = 0.52; N = 6) . Suggesting  that the  repetitions of 

LED stimulation  is required to produce the  long -lasting  effect.  To assess the potential 

contribution of spontaneous drift to the firing changes observed after light stimulation, we 

performed a series of recordings in which, after a stable baseline activity had been established, 

neuronal firing was monitored for an addi tional 10 min prior to LED stimulation. As shown in 

Fig. 1C (vi –vii),  no average mod ification were  observed ( 138  ± 63% of  baseline activity, 

p=0.26, N=9) . Importantly, subsequent LED stimulation  still produce firing decrease  (-40  ±

30% from the drift value, p=  0.04) .

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

Figure  1 Light pulses induce a prolonged reduction in firing activity in mouse cortical 

neurons.  (A)  The current -clamp protocol used to study the effect of light on firing activity. This protocol 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint 11 

included a negative current step to monitor membrane resistance, followed by two depolarization steps 

to elicit firing activity. The first depolarization (LED firing) occurred simultaneously with LED 

stimulation during the light period. In addition, a 1 -se cond test LED pulse was used to evaluate the acute 

change in membrane potential caused by light. ( B)  Transient increased tissue temperature following 5 

seconds of LED stimulation. ( C)  Repeated LED pulses resulted in a long -lasting decrease in firing 

activi ty.  Ci  Time course of the modification of firing activity induced by 10 LED pulses. Representative 

traces of the light effect are shown on the right.  Cii . Time plot illustrating the modification of firing 

activity induced by 6 LED pulses.  Ciii . Statistical quantification of the light effect on firing activity in 

the three time periods.  Civ  Time plot illustrating the absence of modification of firing activity induced 

by 1 LED pulses.  Cv  Statistical quantification of the effect of 1 light pulse.  Cvi  Time plot  illustrating 

the spontaneous evolution of firing activity after stable baseline period.  Cvii -Cvii  Statistical 

quantification of spontaneous evolution and the subsequent LED effect. (Post LED = 10 -16 minutes); 

(ANOVA test followed by Holm post hoc comparisons). Black dots and bars represent the mean and 

95% confidence interval, respectively. Colored lin es depict the evolution of the firing rate across trials 

for each recorded neuron. Raw data and analysis are available at:  https://osf.io/uh73f/ 

The light stimulation results in a significant and enduring average reduction of neuronal 

Rm ( -17 ± 15 MΩ, p=0.001, N=22 , Fig 2 A). Interestingly, the modification of firing produced 

by LED stimulation correlates with the Rm modification (r=0.52  [0.12;0.77] , p=0.013, N= 21,

see Fig 2Aiii) . These results  suggest  that the LED effect on Rm accounts for approximately 

27% of the variability in the LED effect on firing.  On the other  hand,  the average resting 

membrane  potential (Vrest) was  not  consistent  affected by  the light (Fig 2Bi and Bii) and the 

modification of this parameter  only slightly correlate with the modification of  firing ( r=0.36, 

p=0.097, N=22, see  Fig 2Biii).  As previously reported  9,10,16 , during test LED we observed a 

transient hyperpolarization of the membrane potential (Vm) ( -0.3 1 ± 0. 09  mV, p<0.001, N= 38 ,

Fig. 2Ci), which reverts at  -10 0 mV ±  8 mV (N= 14 , data  not shown ). Interestingly,  this acute 

effect of light on Vm did not correlate with the long -term effect on firing (see  Fig  2Ciii), 

suggesting that the two phenomena rely on different cellular mechanisms. Moreover, this lack 

of covariation also suggests that the observed variability in the light effect on neuronal firing is 

not due to methodological artifacts (e.g., the health  of the recorded neuron or its depth in the 

slices). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 

Figure 2. Changes in Rm explain part of the light effect on neuronal firing.  (A)  Repeated LED 

pulses resulted in a decrease in Rm. Ai. Time course of Rm modification induced by 10 LED pulses. 

Aii. Statistical quantification of the light effect on Rm in the three time periods. Aiii. LED -induced 

change in firing activity correlated with  LED -induced change in Rm.  (B)  Repeated LED pulses on Vrest. 

Bi. Time course of Vrest modification. Bii. Statistical quantification of the light effect on Vrest in the 

three time periods. Biii. LED -induced modification of firing activity does not correl ate with LED -

induced modification of Vrest.  (C)  Light induces transient membrane hyperpolarization. Ci. Example 

of transient modification of Vm during light stimulation Cii. Quantification of the transient Vm change. 

Ciii. LED -induced modification of firing activity does not correlate with LED -induced  transient 

modification of Vm. B and C: (post LED = 10 -16 min) ANOVA test followed by Holm post hoc 

comparisons. Black dots and bars represent mean and 95% confidence interval, respectively. Colored 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

lines represent single cell responses. Arrows depict the values for the neuron for wich light produced 

long lasting increase of firing. Raw data and analysis are available at :  https://osf.io/uh73f/ 

## Blue light induces lasting changes in voltage -dependent currents 

## underlying APs 

To investigate  the involvement of  voltage -gated sodium and potassium channels  on the 

effect of light on firing activity , voltage -clamp recordings were performed to  detect  voltage -

gated (VG) outward (putative K⁺) and inward (putative Na⁺) currents. These currents were 

elicited by experimentally modifying the membrane potential to mimic an AP waveform 

representative of cortical pyramidal neuron activity  (Fig  3A, see  Supplementary  Fig  2 for more 

details).  As shown in  Fig  3B, LED stimulation produced a long -lasting reduction in  VG -inward 

current amplitude (66% ± 28% of the pre -LED period, N=11). This effect developed slowly, 

requiring around seven minutes after the first LED stimulus to reach the maximum average 

reduction  (Fig.  3Bii, Biii) and was associated with a slowing of  VG -inward current kinetics 

(rise time from 4.4 ± 1.4 nA/ms to 3.1 ± 1.2 nA/ms; decay time from 3.4 ± 1.4 nA/ms to 2.2 ± 

1.2 nA/ms, N=11, Fig. 3Biv, 3Bv).  Interestingly, the inward current was completely abolished 

in two recorded neurons (18%), which closely matches the proportion of neurons (17%) in 

which firing activity fully disappeared in current -clamp experiments.  It should be noted that in 

some neurons, the reduction of inward current following LED stimulation can revert back (see 

blue trace in  Fig  3Bii) . To isolate possible  transient  LED effects from the long -lasting LED 

effects, the  VG -inward currents produced by the AP LED  were compared with those produced by 

the AP Ctr . As shown in  Fig  3C  (i -iii) , the kinetics of the  VG -inward current were slightly faster 

during LED stimulation than in the control condition (LED rise time = 4.5 ± 1.4 nA/ms, Ctr rise 

time = 4.2 ± 1.2 nA/ms; LED decay time = 3. 4 ± 1.4 nA/ms, Ctr decay time= 3.1 ± 1.4 nA/ms, 

N=11), while the  VG -inward current amplitude  was  not altered (Fig. 3C iv , 3Cv). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 

Figure 3.  Light stimulation alters the voltage -gated inward current involved in AP generation.  (A) 

Voltage clamp protocol used to isolate VG currents. Two consecutive AP potentials were generated by 

voltage command. AP LED  was generated simultaneously with light stimulation during the LED period. 

VG -currents were isolated from resistive and capacitive currents using the method shown in 

Supplementary  Figure 2 . ( B)  LED stimulation produces a sustained reduction in VG inward current 

amplitude and kinetics. Bi. Example of VG -inward current modification by LED stimulation. Bii. 

Temporal evolution of VG inward current amplitude. Black dots and bars represent mean and 95 % CI, 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

respectively. Coloured lines represent single -cell evolution. Biii. Statistical quantification of the average 

VG inward current amplitude in the three periods. Biv. Statistical quantification of the average VG 

inward current rise time in the three periods.  Bv. Statistical quantification of the average membrane 

potential threshold for VG inward current generation in the three periods. Bvi. Statistical quantification 

of the average VG inward current rise time in the three periods. (Post LED = 15 -20 minutes);  (Friedman 

test followed by Conover post hoc comparisons). ( C)  LED stimulation produces a short -term increase 

in VG -inward current kinetics. Ci. Example of overlap of VG -inward currents produced by AP LED  and 

APCtr in the three periods. Cii. Statistical quantification of the change in VG -inward current rise time 

during LED stimulation. Ciii. Statistical quantification of the change in VG -inward current decay time 

during LED stimulation. Civ. Temporal evolu tion of the ratio between AP LED  and APCtr VG -inward 

cu rrent amplitudes (n=11). Raw data and analysis are available at  https://osf.io/pt4br/ 

As shown in  Fig  4, LED stimulation induced a slight, long -lasting reduction in voltage -

gated outward currents that did not reach statistical significance  (average decrease of 45 ± 39 

%, p=0.3 after Holm  correction, N=8 ) ( Fig  4Aii, Aiii).  However t he  comparisons of AP LED  and 

AP Ctr  currents during  LED period  show a clear  transient increase  in  the amplitude  VG -outward 

current during the LED stimulus  (131 ±7 % during  LED,  Fig 4 B) showing  a short -lasting  effect 

of light on this parameter .

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

Figure 4.  Light stimulation modifies the voltage -gated outward current involved in AP generation. 

(A)  LED stimulation produces a long -lasting change in the amplitude of the voltage -gated outward 

current. Ai. Example of outward current modification by LED stimulation. Aii. Temporal evolution of 

VG outward current amplitude. Black dots and bars represent me an and 95% CI, respectively. Colored 

lines represent single -cell evolution. Aiii. Statistical quantification of the average outward current 

amplitude in the three periods (Friedman test followed by Conover post hoc comparisons). ( B)  LED 

stimulation produce s a transient increase in VG outward current amplitude.  Bi.  Example of overlap of 

VG outward currents produced by AP LED  and APCtr in the three periods.  Bii.  Temporal evolution of the 

ratio between AP LED  and APCtr VG outward current amplitudes. Raw data and analysis are available at 

https://osf.io/pt4br/ 

In agreement with the current clamp experiment, the LED stimulation produced a long -

lasting decrease in Rm, as monitored during voltage clamp recording ( -60 ± 45  MΩ  at 15' -20', 

N=10, Fig.  5). 

Figure 5.  Light stimulation produces a long -lasting decrease of membrane resistance.  (A)  Example 

of passive membrane currents induced by 5 mV membrane hyperpolarization used to calculate Rm. ( B) 

Temporal evolution of the Rm change. Black dots and bars represent mean and 95% CI, respectively. 

Colored lines represent single cell evolution . (C)  Statistical quantification of the average Rm changes 

in the three periods (Friedman test followed by Conover post hoc comparisons). Raw data and analysis 

are available at  https://osf.io/pt4br/p 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

Taken together, these results suggest that light causes both transient and long -lasting 

changes in the biophysical properties of voltage -gated channels involved in the AP, as well as 

in  channels involved in resting membrane permeability. Transient effects are likely to be 

produced by the light -induced temperature rise, leading to a faster activation and inactivation 

rate of the VG -inward current  and  an increase in the amplitude of the VG -outward currents 17 .

Long -term changes include a decrease in the amplitude and kinetics of VG -inward currents, a 

heterogeneous effect on VG -outward current amplitude dominated by a decrease  of  the latter, 

and a predominant decrease in Rm.  The theoretically expected effects of changing these three 

parameters on the direction of firing change are illustrated in  Fig  6A.  In order to evaluate  their 

reciprocal  contribution to the light -induced long -lasting decrease of firing, we plotted the 

modification of evoked firing activity,  that was  monitored before and at the end of voltage 

clamp protocol, as a function of the modifications of the VG -current s and the Rm (Fig 6B). 

This analysis suggests that the light -induced decrease of firing rate is a  multifactorial process 

with the modification of VG -inward current being the principal  actor . A large decrease in VG 

inward currents was always associated with a large decrease in firing rate. On the other hand, a 

small decrease in inward currents was associated with either a strong, medium, small or no 

decrease in firing rate, depending on the  direction and magnitude of the modification of VG -

outward currents and Rm. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 

Figure 6.  Relative contribution of the light -induced changes in VG -currents and Rm to the 

modification of neuronal firing rate . ( A)  Expected impact of VG -currents and Rm modifications on 

the direction of firing rate change. ( B) Top, 3D plot illustrating the light -induced modification of firing 

rate as a function of the  light -induced modification of VG -inward, VG -outward and Rm. Bottom, 

Classification of the effect on firing activity associated with the different combinations of observed 

changes in VG currents and Rm. 

## Heterogenous effect of blue light stimulation on cortical human 

## neurons 

The effect of blue light stimulation on human cortical neurons was investigated using a 

current clamp configuration, following the same protocol as for mouse neurons (Fig 1A). Tissue 

samples came from  nine  patients differing in age,  sex,  pathology, and the explanted cortical 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

region.  LED stimulation resulted in a heterogeneous modification of firing activity in the fifteen 

neurons recorded. Specifically, there was a significant long -lasting reduction of firing in 8 

neurons (55%) and a significant long -lasting increase in firing in 4 ne urons (27%) (Fig 7A). 

This proportion of excited and inhibited neurons was significantly different from what was 

observed in mice (p<0.001, χ² test). Exploratory analysis did not reveal any distinguishable 

biophysical properties explaining this dif ference (for more details, see  https://osf.io/q9bfv ). 

However, the proportion of excited neurons was significantly higher in tissue from  female 

patients compared to male patients (83% vs 12%, respectively, p=0.008, χ² test, Fig 7B , see also 

Supplementary  Fig  3 A-B). Moreover, the difference between human and mouse samples 

disappeared when female neurons were removed from the human sample (6% vs 12% increase 

in firing, respectively, Bayesian statistic, BF 01 =2.85), suggesting that sexual dimorphism could 

be the cause of the heterogeneity in the effect of LED stimulation on firing in the human sample. 

Other factors, including, patient age, and underlying pathology, may also act as confounding 

variables explaining the sex -related difference in the effect of light on neuronal firing .

However , exploratory analyses show  only moderate correlation between age and light effect 

and no effect due  to the  donor pathology  (Fig  7 C -D).  LED stimulation did not produce any 

modification of Rm or Vrest in human neurons ( Supplementary  figure  4). 

To test whether the sex difference in light effects is also present in mice, ten additional cortical 

neurons were recorded from female mice. As shown in  Supplementary  Fig  3 C-D, light 

stimulation produces a similar long -lasting inhibition of firing activity in mouse neurons from 

both sexes (sex effect p = 0.87; BF 01  = 3.5). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

Figure 7 . Light Pulses Induce a Prolonged and Heterogeneous Modification in Firing 

Activity in Human  Cortical Neurons . (A)  Repeated LED pulses induce a long -lasting 

decrease in firing activity in 55% of recorded neurons and an increase in firing in 27% of 

recorded neurons.  Ai  Representative traces showing the effect of light on two different neurons. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

Aii  Time course of the firing activity modification induced by 10 LED pulses.  Aiii  Statistical 

quantification of the light effect on firing activity across three time periods (Post LED = 6 -11 

minutes).  (B)  Sexual dimorphism in the long -lasting effect of light on the firing modification 

of human neurons.  Bi  Long -lasting LED -induced firing modification in neurons from different 

patients . Bii  Long -lasting LED effect on firing activity as a function of the sex of the donor 

patient.  (C)  Linear  correlation between the effect of light and patient age  (D)  Long lasting 

effect of light on neuronal firing do not depend on patient pathology  .Blue, orange, and black 

dots in B respectively represent neurons that showed a significant increase, a significant 

decrease, or no change in firing activity.  Data are presented as mean ± 95% CI . Raw data and 

analysis are available at:  https://osf.io/2wfy5/ .

Interestingly, human neurons  also  differ from mouse neurons in their acute response to light on 

membrane potential. In 4 out of 23 (17%) human neurons, blue light produced a depolarization 

of the membrane potential ( Fig  8Ai , Aii), an effect that was never observed in mouse neurons 

in the present study ( Fig  8B, p<0.001, χ² test) nor previously reported in  other  studies. The 

reversal potential of this effect was estimated at  -35 mV (N=1). When these neurons were 

excluded from the analysis, a global membrane hyperpolarization was observed (Vm =  -0.22 

mV ± 0.094 mV, p < 0.001;  Fig  8Aiii ), consistent with the finding in mouse neurons (Bayesian 

statistic, Mice vs. Human, BF01 = 1.9).  The proportion of neurons exhibiting the depolarizing 

effect was  slightly  larger in females compared to males, although this difference did not reach 

significance (25% in females vs. 9% in males, p=0.31  χ²  test,  BF 01=1.76). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

Figure 8.  Heterogeneous modification of the membrane  potential by LED stimulation in human 

neurons . (A)  Light -induced membrane potential modification in human neurons.  Ai  Raincloud plot 

showing the effect of light on the entire sample.  Aii  Average traces illustrating the light -induced 

membrane potential modification in four neurons showing depolarization and one neuron showing 

hyperpolarization (average effect produced by ten stimulations).  Aiii  Raincloud plot of the light effect 

excluding the four depolarizing neurons.  (B)  The proportion of light -induced mem brane depolarization 

was significantly higher in neurons from humans compared to those from mice.  (C)  LED -induced Vm 

modification in neurons from different patients (in red the four neurons showing Vm depolarization). 

Raw data and analysis are available at :  https://osf.io/2wfy5/ 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

# Discussion 

The present study sought to determine whether light stimulation can induce a sustained 

reduction in neuronal excitability within the central  nervous system. We show that repeated 

blue light exposure elicits a marked and persistent decrease in evoked firing activity in cortical 

neurons from both male and female mice, with a reduction of approximately 60% relative to 

baseline. This effect endures  for tens of minutes following the cessation of stimulation. In 

human cortical neurons, however, the response was more variable, with a subset of neurons —

particularly those derived from female subjects —exhibiting increased excitability in response 

to light . The prolonged modulation of neuronal activity is likely mediated by combined 

alterations in passive membrane properties (including membrane resistance, Rm) and active 

membrane conductance, notably voltage -gated Na⁺ and K⁺ channels. 

## Light Pulse Parameters Driving Sustained Suppression of 

## Neuronal Activity 

Previous studies have demonstrated a reduction in the firing activity of several CNS neurons 

during continuous light stimulation within the visible spectrum  9–11,16 . However, these 

modifications were transient, as firing activity generally reverted rapidly to pre -light levels after 

stimulation ceased. This rapid recovery was particularly evident in the study by Owen et al.  10 ,

where green light  at 15 mW was used . In the present study, long -lasting firing inhibition was 

induced by pulses of blue light (430 –495 nm) at 19 mW. Although we cannot rule out that the 

difference in inhibition duration between the two studies is due to the 4 mW difference in light 

power, a m ore likely explanation is the difference in wavelength, with blue light carrying more 

energy than green light.  We show that ten or six repetitions of light stimulation are equally 

effective in producing long -lasting  firing inhibition. Notably, as shown in  Fig  1Cii, firing 

activity  appears to  continue  decrease ing  in the minutes following the sixth pulse, suggesting 

that light acts as a triggering signal for an effect that requires several minutes to fully develop. 

However, a single LED stimulation was not sufficient to produce long -lasting modifications. In 

contrast, six repetitions of LED stimulation produced effects similar to those observed after tens 

of repetitions.  This suggests that few light pulses may already be sufficient to produce the 

maximal effect on firing reduction 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

## Phototoxicity and its implications for long -lasting effects of light 

Although the energy carried by visible light is insufficient to cause ionization and directly 

damage DNA or other cellular structures, it can still trigger photochemical reactions and 

oxidative stress, leading to cellular damage. For instance, exposure of  cultured epithelial cells 

to continuous blue light resulted in approximately 10% cell mortality, potentially due to 

mitochondrial generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS)  18 . In cortical neuronal cultures, 

blue light stimulation but not red or green light, led to increased expression of several neuronal 

activity -regulated genes, which the authors interpreted as a cellular response to oxidative stress 

> 19

. These findings were  later replicated by  20  who also observed increased neuronal mortality 

associated with light exposure. However, the se  effect s of light where  not caused by a direct 

interaction with neuronal cells but rather mediated by ROS generation due to the interaction of 

light with the culture media (see also  21 ). To our knowledge, the potential cytotoxic effects of 

visible light on neurons, particularly under slice or in vivo conditions, remain insufficiently 

established. Our findings do not support a marked acute cytotoxic effect. Although light 

stimulation altere d several biophysical properties of recorded neurons, there was no clear 

evidence of compromised cell viability in the short term. Neuronal death is typically associated 

with a rapid membrane depolarization; however, only a modest depolarization was ob served 

following light exposure. In addition, the light -induced change in membrane resistance (−9%) 

was comparable in magnitude to variations reported under other experimental conditions  22,23 .

Furthermore, while firing activity was reduced, it remained detectable in most neurons and, in 

some cases, showed partial or complete recovery over time. Nevertheless, we cannot exclude 

the  possibility that repeated LED stimulation may affect neuronal survival over longer 

timescales. Addressing this question will require complementary approaches beyond in vitro 

electrophysiology (see Perspectives). 

## Cellular  mechanisms of light effect on firing activity 

Among the various mechanisms that could contribute to the light -induced, long -lasting 

reduction in firing activity, we highlight the decrease in membrane resistance and the reduction 

of inward active currents involved in action potential depolarization. Pe arson correlation 

suggests that the former accounts for approximately 27% of the LED effect on firing.  The 

effects of light on membrane resistance are likely due to a modification of the permeability of 

leak membrane channels. This could involve an increase in the permeability of inwardly 

rectifying potassium channels (Kir), which have already been suggeste d to contribute to the 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

transient membrane hyperpolarization induced by light stimulation  10 . Concerning the long -

lasting modification of the inward current, we observed a decrease in its amplitude, 

accompanied by an increase in its duration ( increase  of  rise and decay times). This suggests a 

modification in the permeability and activation -inactivation properties of the Na⁺ which are 

primarily involved in action potential generation in cortical neurons  24 . Interesting inward 

currents become faster (with decreased rise and decay times) during LED stimulation. 

Simultaneously, an increase in the amplitude of the outward, putative potassium current is 

observed. These acute effects are likely due to the transient  temperature increase during light 

stimulation  17 . On the other hand, the transient temperature increase during LED stimulation is 

unlikely to be the cause of the long -lasting effects on firing activity and membrane properties, 

since it has been shown that  temperature -dependent  modifications of neuronal activity  rapidly 

revert to their initial values once warming ceases  25 . Moreover, it should be noted that the 

temperature change produced by LED stimulation (1.8°C) remained within the range of natural 

physiological fluctuations (2 -3 °C 26 ), excluding  any thermal toxicity to the neurons.  Finally, 

one possible mechanism leading to firing reduction could be the reported increase in 

GABAergic transmission in cortical neurons in response to visible light stimulation  27 .

Although this effect  reverted within 3 –5 minutes, repetition of the stimulation and/or an 

increase in light power could account for the long -lasting reduction observed in the present 

study.  Further experiments performed in the presence of GABA receptor blockers are required 

to address this possibility. 

## Species and sex differences in light effects 

We identified two main differences in light responses between mouse and human cortical 

neurons. First, a long -lasting increase in firing activity was observed in approximately 30% of 

human neurons, whereas this effect was largely absent in mice. This appar ent species difference 

may be influenced by a sex -specific effect observed only in human tissue, with neurons from 

female patients more frequently exhibiting increased excitability in response to light than those 

from male patients. Second, an acute depola rizing response to light was detected in a subset of 

human neurons (17%) but was not observed in mice. These differences may reflect known 

divergences in the biophysical properties of human versus rodent neurons 28 –31 . While previous 

studies have suggested that light -induced hyperpolarization primarily involves increased 

permeability of inwardly rectifying K⁺ (Kir) channels 10 , the depolarizing responses observed in 

some human neurons are more consistent with modulation of channels permeable to Na⁺ and/or 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 

Ca²⁺, such as Na⁺ leak channels or transient receptor potential (TRP) channels. The observed 

sex -related differences in the long -lasting effects of light may arise from established functional, 

anatomical, biochemical, genetic, and electrophysiological dist inctions between male and 

female brains 32,33 . However, this interpretation remains tentative and requires further 

investigation. 

## Limitations and cavate 

A key limitation concerns the interpretation of the apparent sex -dependent differences in  human 

neuronal responses to light. Although supported by statistical analysis, this finding arises from 

an exploratory approach in which multiple factors, including age, pathology, and intrinsic 

electrophysiological properties, were examined as potential s ources of variability. In addition, 

differences in age and cortical sampling between male and female subjects may act as 

confounding factors, thereby limiting the strength of this conclusion. Replication in larger and 

more controlled cohorts will therefore  be required to confirm this observation . Finally, technical 

constraints inherent to the patch -clamp technique, including cytoplasmic dialysis and seal 

instability  23,34 , may introduce variability in electrophysiological recordings and affect the 

accurate quantification of light -induced effects, particularly over prolonged durations. 

Alternative approaches will thus be necessary to more reliably assess the persistence of th e

firing changes described here (see following section). 

## Perspectives and conclusions 

The present work was designed to assess whether visible light stimulation can induce durable 

changes in neuronal activity, and thereby inform its potential as a therapeutic strategy. The 

findings support the relevance of this approach and provide a basis for further investigation into 

its clinical applicability. Building on these results, we outli ne a conceptual framework to guide 

future research towards translational development :

First, the effects of light on human neurons require confirmation in larger and more 

standardized in vitro cohorts. In particular, the apparent sex -related differences observed here 

should be specifically addressed, alongside the potential influence of pha rmacological 

treatments. The use of human brain organoids  35  may help increase tissue availability, reduce 

variability through standardized protocols, and enable the assessment of both efficacy and 

safety over extended time scales. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

Second, it will be important to determine whether the long -lasting reduction in neuronal 

excitability observed ex vivo can be reproduced in vivo. While transient inhibitory effects of 

light have been reported in animal models  10,11 , direct electrophysiological recordings and 

behavioural assessments will be necessary to evaluate the persistence and functional relevance 

of these effects in intact systems. 

Third, the duration and reversibility of light -induced modulation of neuronal firing should be 

systematically characterized. From a therapeutic perspective, it is essential to establish whether 

these effects can be maintained over prolonged periods and re -induced following recovery. 

Given the limited temporal window of acute brain slices, alternative models —including 

neuronal cultures, organotypic slices, brain organoids, and in vivo preparations with chronic 

recordings —should be considered. These approache s would also allow a more comprehensive 

evaluation of long -term safety, encompassing both cellular integrity  and possible behavioral 

effects. 

Fourth, the sustained inhibitory effects of light suggest potential applications in neurological 

disorders characterized by neuronal hyperexcitability, such as epilepsy, migraine  36,37 , autism 

spectrum disorder 38,39 , and possibly schizophrenia 40  . Notably, optogenetic strategies are 

already widely used to suppress pathological activity in animal models of epilepsy  41 –47 . In this 

context, it would be of particular interest to determine whether light alone, without exogenous 

opsin expression, can exert intrinsic antiepileptic effects using  existing experimental platforms. 

Finally, optimization of stimulation parameters will be required to maximize efficacy. The 

present study employed 5 -s pulses of blue light at 19 mW; future work should explore variations 

in wavelength, intensity, and duration. In particular, longer wavelen gths may offer improved 

tissue penetration, enabling modulation of deeper and more extensive brain regions  48 .

Our findings support the potential of visible light stimulation as a non -invasive strategy for 

modulating neuronal excitability, with possible translational relevance. Future studies,  guided 

by the framework outlined here, will be critical to validate these effects in human systems, 

optimize stimulation paradigms, and establish the conditions under which this approach may 

be developed into a therapeutic intervention for brain disorders .

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

# Data  availability 

All raw electrophysiological traces, code for the analysis, analysis and statistics are accessible 

via the Open Science Framework website ( https://osf.io/6jqye/ )

# Acknowledgements 

We thank  Hajar EL YAQOTI and Fabrice ABATE  who  participate d in  some  preliminary 

experiments .

# Funding 

The authors declare that they have received no specific funding for this study. 

# Competing  interests 

The authors declare  that they have  no financial or non -financial conflicts of interest in 

relation to the content of the article. 

# Supplementary  material 

Supplementary  material  would be  available at Brain online 

# References 

1.  Rezaei S, Morshedi K, Shafabakhsh R, Mahjoubin -Tehran M. Chapter 5  - Current 

therapies for neurological disorders and their limitations. In: Khan H, Aschner M, Mirzaei 

H, eds.  Phytonutrients and Neurological Disorders . Academic Press; 2023:107 -130. 

doi:10.1016/B978 -0-12 -824467 -8.00009 -7

2.  Kendre S, Kumbhare M, Mishra A. Introduction to Complex Brain Disorders, Currently 

Available Therapies, and Their Limitations. In: Alexander A, ed.  Application of 

Nanocarriers in Brain Delivery of Therapeutics . Springer Nature; 2024:1 -14. 

doi:10.1007/978 -981 -97 -2859 -6_1 

3.  Lozano AM, Lipsman N, Bergman H, et al. Deep brain stimulation: current challenges 

and future directions.  Nat Rev Neurol . 2019;15(3):148 -160. doi:10.1038/s41582 -018 -

0128 -2

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

4.  Cantone M. Clinical Updates and Perspectives on Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation 

(TMS).  J Clin Med . 2024;13(13):13. doi:10.3390/jcm13133794 

5.  Zhang T, Pan N, Wang Y, Liu C, Hu S. Transcranial Focused Ultrasound 

Neuromodulation: A Review of the Excitatory and Inhibitory Effects on Brain Activity in 

Human and Animals.  Front Hum Neurosci . 2021;15. doi:10.3389/fnhum.2021.749162 

6.  Malvea A, Babaei F, Boulay C, Sachs A, Park J. Deep brain stimulation for Parkinson’s 

Disease: A Review and Future Outlook.  Biomed Eng Lett . 2022;12(3):303 -316. 

doi:10.1007/s13534 -022 -00226 -y

7.  Pierroz V, Folcher M. From Photobiolumination to Optogenerapy, Recent Advances in 

NIR Light Photomedicine Applications. In: 2018. Accessed February 17, 2025. 

https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/From -Photobiolumination -to -Optogenerapy%2C -

Recent -in -Pier roz -Folcher/c9b25c64490122c8099fd428f2fd35d737b6b786 

8.  Ramezani F, Neshasteh -Riz A, Ghadaksaz A, Fazeli SM, Janzadeh A, Hamblin MR. 

Mechanistic aspects of photobiomodulation therapy in the nervous system.  Lasers Med 

Sci . 2022;37(1):11 -18. doi:10.1007/s10103 -021 -03277 -2

9.  Ait Ouares K, Beurrier C, Canepari M, Laverne G, Kuczewski N. Opto nongenetics 

inhibition of neuronal firing.  Eur J Neurosci . 2019;49(1):6 -26. doi:10.1111/ejn.14251 

10.  Owen SF, Liu MH, Kreitzer AC. Thermal constraints on in vivo optogenetic 

manipulations.  Nat Neurosci . 2019;22(7):1061 -1065. doi:10.1038/s41593 -019 -0422 -3

11.  Mazo C, Nissant A, Saha S, Peroni E, Lledo PM, Lepousez G. Long -range GABAergic 

projections contribute to cortical feedback control of sensory processing.  Nat Commun .

2022;13(1):6879. doi:10.1038/s41467 -022 -34513 -0

12.  Lightning A, Bourzeix M, Beurrier C, Kuczewski N. Effects of discontinuous blue light 

stimulation on the electrophysiological properties of neurons lacking opsin expression in 

vitro: Implications for optogenetic experiments.  Eur J Neurosci . 2023;57(6):885 -899. 

doi:10.1111/ejn.15927 

13. Stujenske JM, Spellman T, Gordon JA.  Modeling the Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Light 

and Heat Propagation for In Vivo Optogenetics.  Cell Rep . 2015;12(3):525 -534. 

doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2015.06.036 

14.  Senova S, Scisniak I, Chiang CC, et al. Experimental assessment of the safety and 

potential efficacy of high irradiance photostimulation of brain tissues.  Sci Rep .

2017;7:43997. doi:10.1038/srep43997 

15.  Keysers C, Gazzola V, Wagenmakers EJ. Using Bayes factor hypothesis testing in 

neuroscience to establish evidence of absence.  Nat Neurosci . 2020;23(7):788 -799. 

doi:10.1038/s41593 -020 -0660 -4

16.  Lightning A, Bourzeix M, Beurrier C, Kuczewski N. Effects of discontinuous blue light 

stimulation on the electrophysiological properties of neurons lacking opsin expression in 

vitro: Implications for optogenetic experiments.  Eur J Neurosci . Published online 

February 1, 2023. doi:10.1111/ejn.15927 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

17.  Volgushev M, Vidyasagar TR, Chistiakova M, Yousef T, Eysel UT. Membrane properties 

and spike generation in rat visual cortical cells during reversible cooling.  J Physiol .

2000;522 Pt 1:59 -76. 

18.  Godley BF, Shamsi FA, Liang FQ, Jarrett SG, Davies S, Boulton M. Blue Light Induces 

Mitochondrial DNA Damage and Free Radical Production in Epithelial Cells*.  J Biol 

Chem . 2005;280(22):21061 -21066. doi:10.1074/jbc.M502194200 

19.  Tyssowski KM, Gray JM. Blue Light Increases Neuronal Activity -Regulated Gene 

Expression in the Absence of Optogenetic Proteins.  eNeuro . 2019;6(5):ENEURO.0085 -

19.2019. doi:10.1523/ENEURO.0085 -19.2019 

20.  Duke CG, Savell KE, Tuscher JJ, Phillips RA, Day JJ. Blue Light -Induced Gene 

Expression Alterations in Cultured Neurons Are the Result of Phototoxic Interactions 

with Neuronal Culture Media.  eNeuro . 2020;7(1). doi:10.1523/ENEURO.0386 -19.2019 

21.  Stockley JH, Evans K, Matthey M, et al. Surpassing light -induced cell damage in vitro 

with novel cell culture media.  Sci Rep . 2017;7(1):849. doi:10.1038/s41598 -017 -00829 -x

22.  Brager DH, Johnston D. Plasticity of intrinsic excitability during long -term depression is 

mediated through mGluR -dependent changes in I(h) in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal 

neurons.  J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci . 2007;27(51):13926 -13937. 

doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3520 -07.2007 

23.  Kaczorowski CC, Disterhoft J, Spruston N. Stability and plasticity of intrinsic membrane 

properties in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons: effects of internal anions.  J Physiol .

2007;578(Pt 3):799 -818. doi:10.1113/jphysiol.2006.124586 

24.  Catterall WA. Voltage gated sodium and calcium channels: Discovery, structure, 

function, and Pharmacology.  Channels Austin Tex . 2023;17(1):2281714. 

doi:10.1080/19336950.2023.2281714 

25. Volgushev M, Vidyasagar TR, Chistiakova M, Eysel UT.  Synaptic transmission in the 

neocortex during reversible cooling.  Neuroscience . 2000;98(1):9 -22. 

26.  Andersen P, Moser EI. Brain temperature and hippocampal function.  Hippocampus .

1995;5(6):491 -498. doi:10.1002/hipo.450050602 

27.  Leszkiewicz DN, Aizenman E. Reversible modulation of GABA(A) receptor -mediated 

currents by light is dependent on the redox state of the receptor.  Eur J Neurosci .

2003;17(10):2077 -2083. 

28. Testa -Silva G, Verhoog MB, Linaro D, et al.  High bandwidth synaptic communication 

and frequency tracking in human neocortex.  PLoS Biol . 2014;12(11):e1002007. 

doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1002007 

29.  Eyal G, Verhoog MB, Testa -Silva G, et al. Unique membrane properties and enhanced 

signal processing in human neocortical neurons.  eLife . 2016;5:e16553. 

doi:10.7554/eLife.16553 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 

30. Gidon A, Zolnik TA, Fidzinski P, et al.  Dendritic action potentials and computation in 

human layer 2/3 cortical neurons.  Science . 2020;367(6473):83 -87. 

doi:10.1126/science.aax6239 

31.  Mihaljević B, Larrañaga P, Bielza C. Comparing the Electrophysiology and Morphology 

of Human and Mouse Layer 2/3 Pyramidal Neurons With Bayesian Networks.  Front 

Neuroinformatics . 2021;15. doi:10.3389/fninf.2021.580873 

32.  Iezzi D, Cáceres -Rodríguez A, Strauss B, Chavis P, Manzoni OJ. Sexual differences in 

neuronal and synaptic properties across subregions of the mouse insular cortex.  Biol Sex 

Differ . 2024;15(1):29. doi:10.1186/s13293 -024 -00593 -4

33.  Lafta MS, Mwinyi J, Affatato O, et al. Exploring sex differences: insights into gene 

expression, neuroanatomy, neurochemistry, cognition, and pathology.  Front Neurosci .

2024;18. doi:10.3389/fnins.2024.1340108 

34.  Robinson DW, Cameron WE. Time -dependent changes in input resistance of rat 

hypoglossal motoneurons associated with whole -cell recording.  J Neurophysiol .

2000;83(5):3160 -3164. doi:10.1152/jn.2000.83.5.3160 

35.  Chen HI, Song H, Ming G li. Applications of Human Brain Organoids to Clinical 

Problems.  Dev Dyn . 2019;248(1):53 -64. doi:10.1002/dvdy.24662 

36.  Aurora SK, Wilkinson F. The brain is hyperexcitable in migraine.  Cephalalgia Int J 

Headache . 2007;27(12):1442 -1453. doi:10.1111/j.1468 -2982.2007.01502.x 

37.  Demarquay G, Mauguière F. Central Nervous System Underpinnings of Sensory 

Hypersensitivity in Migraine: Insights from Neuroimaging and Electrophysiological 

Studies.  Headache J Head Face Pain . 2016;56(9):1418 -1438. doi:10.1111/head.12651 

38.  Takarae Y, Sweeney J. Neural Hyperexcitability in Autism Spectrum Disorders.  Brain 

Sci . 2017;7(10):129. doi:10.3390/brainsci7100129 

39. Hussein Y, Tripathi U, Choudhary A, et al.  Early maturation and hyperexcitability is a 

shared phenotype of cortical neurons derived from different ASD -associated mutations. 

Transl Psychiatry . 2023;13:246. doi:10.1038/s41398 -023 -02535 -x

40.  Inan M, Petros TJ, Anderson SA. Losing your inhibition: linking cortical GABAergic 

interneurons to schizophrenia.  Neurobiol Dis . 2013;53:36 -48. 

doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2012.11.013 

41. Chiang CC, Ladas TP, Gonzalez -Reyes LE, Durand DM.  Seizure suppression by high 

frequency optogenetic stimulation using in vitro and in vivo animal models of epilepsy. 

Brain Stimulat . 2014;7(6):890 -899. doi:10.1016/j.brs.2014.07.034 

42.  Bui AD, Alexander A, Soltesz I. Seizing Control: From Current Treatments to 

Optogenetic Interventions in Epilepsy.  Neurosci Rev J Bringing Neurobiol Neurol 

Psychiatry . 2017;23(1):68 -81. doi:10.1177/1073858415619600 

43.  Chang WJ, Chang WP, Shyu BC. Suppression of cortical seizures by optic stimulation of 

the reticular thalamus in PV -mhChR2 -YFP BAC transgenic mice.  Mol Brain .

2017;10(1):42. doi:10.1186/s13041 -017 -0320 -0

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted March 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.04.25.650615 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32 

44.  Choy M, Duffy BA, Lee JH. Optogenetic study of networks in epilepsy.  J Neurosci Res .

2017;95(12):2325 -2335. doi:10.1002/jnr.23767 

45.  Streng ML, Krook -Magnuson E. Excitation, but not inhibition, of the fastigial nucleus 

provides powerful control over temporal lobe seizures.  J Physiol . 2020;598(1):171 -187. 

doi:10.1113/JP278747 

46.  Ledri M, Andersson M, Wickham J, Kokaia M. Optogenetics for controlling seizure 

circuits for translational approaches.  Neurobiol Dis . 2023;184:106234. 

doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2023.106234 

47.  Lévesque M, Wang S, Etter G, Williams S, Avoli M. Optogenetic activation of septal 

inhibitory cells abates focal seizures.  J Neurophysiol . 2023;129(5):1218 -1223. 

doi:10.1152/jn.00111.2023 

48.  Deng W, Goldys EM, Farnham MMJ, Pilowsky PM. Optogenetics, the intersection 

between physics and neuroscience: light stimulation of neurons in physiological 

conditions.  Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol . 2014;307(11):R1292 -1302. 

doi:10.1152/ajpregu.00072.2014