Title: Distinct regulation of intrinsic persistent firing by cholinergic, noradrenergic and dopaminergic neuromodulations in the mouse auditory cortex

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.05.03.722484v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
> 1
> Distinct  regulation  of  intrinsic  persistent  firing  by  cholinergic, noradrenergic and dopaminergic neuromodulations in the mouse auditory cortex
> A. Tobias Price 1,2 , Antonio Reboreda 1,2 , Janelle Pakan 1,2,3,4 , Motoharu Yoshida 1,2,4,* 1Leibniz Institute for Neurobiology, Magdeburg, Germany
> 2Deutsche Zentrum für Neurodegenerativ Erkrankungen, Magdeburg, Germany
> 3Otto von Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany
> 4Center for Behavioral Brain Sciences, Magdeburg, Germany
> Abstract
> Neuromodulators shape brain function by regulating neural activity in area- and state-dependent  manners.  While  persistent  firing  (PF),  a cellular  correlate  of  short-term information retention, is strongly regulated by neuromodulation in executive and memory areas, such regulation in the sensory cortex remains less well understood. Here, using  in vitro  patch-clamp  recordings,  we  investigated  how  cholinergic,  noradrenergic,  and dopaminergic systems regulate intrinsic PF in mouse auditory cortex (AC) neurons. We found that cholinergic and noradrenergic activation support PF, similar to observations in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) but unlike noradrenergic suppression seen in the hippocampus. In contrast, dopamine and D1 receptor activation showed no clear effect on AC PF, contrasting with their suppressive role in the PFC. Furthermore, PF was significantly stronger in corticocollicular than corticocallosal neurons. These findings reveal diverse monoamine regulation of intrinsic  PF, offering a  potential  cellular  basis  for sensory  information maintenance under conditions of stress and reward.
> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.03.722484 doi: bioRxiv preprint 2
> Introduction
> Persistent neuronal firing, which is a repetitive spiking activity of neurons outlasting a triggering stimulus, has long been considered a fundamental cellular mechanism supporting short-term  information  storage,  working  memory,  and  context-dependent  sensory processing (Fuster & Alexander, 1971; Goldman-Rakic, 1995; Major & Tank, 2004). Auditory cortex (AC) neurons exhibit persistent firing during tasks requiring auditory memory or attention across species. For instance, persistent firing in AC has been shown to reflect task-relevant information and support short-term retention in humans (Kumar et al., 2016). Delay-period persistent activity of AC neurons has been observed in nonhuman primates (Huang et al., 2016), rats (Sakurai, 1994) and mice (Yu et al., 2021), and correlates with auditory working memory (Huang et al., 2016; Yu et al., 2021). Persistent firing can arise from intrinsic membrane mechanisms, recurrent synaptic excitation, or a combination of both, often under the influence of neuromodulatory systems (Reboreda et al., 2018). Understanding how neuromodulators regulate persistent firing in defined cortical cell types remains essential for elucidating how internal brain states shape sensory and cognitive computations. Acetylcholine (ACh) has been one of the most extensively studied neuromodulators in the context of persistent firing. Cholinergic signaling is strongly associated with arousal, attention, and learning (Hasselmo & Sarter, 2011), and numerous studies have shown that activation of muscarinic acetylcholine receptors can induce or enhance persistent firing in cortical and hippocampal pyramidal neurons (Egorov et al., 2002; Fraser & MacVicar, 1996; Klink & Alonso, 1997; Knauer et al., 2013; Navaroli et  al., 2012; Tai et al., 2011). Mechanistically, cholinergic  modulation engages calcium-dependent nonspecific cation currents and suppresses adaptation-promoting potassium conductances, thereby enabling sustained depolarization and spiking following transient input in individual cells (Haj-Dahmane & Andrade, 1998; Knauer & Yoshida, 2019; Tai et al., 2011). We refer to such persistent firing supported by individual neurons as “intrinsic persistent firing”. In the auditory  cortex  specifically, cholinergic  terminals  and  receptor  activation  can  induce persistent firing in layer V pyramidal neurons (Fu et al., 2019; Joshi et al., 2015), highlighting a potential  cellular  mechanism  through  which  cholinergic  inputs  modulate  auditory processing and memory-related functions. Noradrenaline (NA, norepinephrine) is a neuromodulator released by the locus coeruleus and is strongly implicated in arousal, attention, and working memory (Aston-Jones  & Cohen,  2005; Sara, 2009).  In the  prefrontal  cortex, noradrenergic signaling enhances working memory performance by strengthening persistent firing and reducing noise in cortical networks (Arnsten & Goldman-Rakic, 1985; Wang et al., 2007). At the cellular level, NA can increase intrinsic excitability and promote sustained depolarizations by modulating  potassium  and  calcium  conductances  (Constantinople  & Bruno,  2011; McCormick et al., 1991). More recently, we and others have shown that NA supports persistent firing in prefrontal cortex cells while it suppresses persistent firing in the hippocampus  (Valero-Aracama  et  al.,  2021;  Zhang  et  al.,  2013).  However,  whether noradrenergic receptor activation can support persistent firing in auditory cortical pyramidal neurons, and how its effects compare to those of acetylcholine, remains largely unexplored. Dopamine (DA) represents another key neuromodulator implicated in working memory in addition to reinforcement learning, motivation, and cognitive control (Schultz, 1998;  Seamans  & Yang,  2004).  Particularly  in  the  prefrontal  cortex,  dopaminergic
> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.03.722484 doi: bioRxiv preprint 3modulation of persistent activity is essential for maintaining task-relevant information (Goldman-Rakic, 1995; Seamans & Yang, 2004). Both experimental and theoretical studies have demonstrated that DA can stabilize or destabilize persistent firing depending on receptor subtype and activation level, often following an inverted-U relationship (Durstewitz et al., 2000; Vijayraghavan et al., 2007). Both  in vivo  persistent firing and intrinsic persistent firing  in vitro  are suppressed by DA through D1/D5 receptor activation, suggesting a suppressive effect of DA in PFC and the entorhinal cortex (Batallán-Burrowes & Chapman, 2018; Lançon et al., 2021; Sidiropoulou et al., 2009; Vijayraghavan et al., 2007). In the auditory cortex, DA supports plasticity and learning where D1/D5 receptor activation enhances, and is required for, consolidation of auditory discrimination learning (Schicknick et al., 2008, 2012). It has also been shown that D1/D5 activation strengthens recurrent cortical feedback and promotes more sustained responses to relevant auditory stimuli, indicating  DA  can enhance  persistent  sensory representations  (Happel  et  al.,  2014). However,  it remains  unclear whether DA can  directly support or  modulate  intrinsic persistent firing in auditory cortical neurons. Cortical pyramidal neurons may also contribute to working memory in a projection-specific manner. In the prefrontal cortex (PFC), while pyramidal tract (PT) neurons show distinct contributions to working memory, intratelencephalic (IT) neurons provide temporal information (Bae et al., 2021). An  in vitro  study has indicated that intrinsic persistent firing is stronger in PT than IT neurons in the PFC (Dembrow et al., 2010). In the auditory cortex, corticocollicular (C-Col) neurons, which project to the inferior colliculus, and corticocallosal (C-Cal) neurons, which project to the contralateral cortex, represent two major and functionally distinct subpopulations (Slater et al., 2013). Previous work demonstrated that an activation of cholinergic terminals drives C-Col neurons to exhibit prolonged persistent firing, while C-Cal neurons did not (Joshi et al., 2016). However, whether this difference arises  from  intrinsic  cellular  properties  and  whether  it  depends  on  the  type  of neuromodulators has not been examined. Together, existing studies support a central role for neuromodulators in enabling persistent firing associated with working memory, but leave unresolved how different neuromodulatory systems compare at the level of intrinsic cellular mechanisms of persistent firing in sensory cortex, and whether such modulations are distinct in comparison to executive and memory regions such as the PFC and the hippocampus. In particular, it remains unknown whether noradrenergic and dopaminergic signaling can support or modulate persistent firing in AC pyramidal neurons, and how such effects compare to cholinergic modulation. Furthermore, whether persistent firing is differentially invoked across distinct layer V projection neuron populations has not been addressed with respect to monoaminergic neuromodulation. In the present study, we examined neuromodulator-supported persistent firing in layer V pyramidal neurons of the mouse auditory cortex by combining whole-cell patch-clamp recordings in acute brain slices with retrograde labeling and immunostaining to identify anatomically segregated projection targets and neuromodulatory influences. We compared the effects of cholinergic, noradrenergic, and dopaminergic receptor activation on persistent firing and assessed differences between corticocollicular and corticocallosal projection neurons. Our results demonstrate that cholinergic and noradrenergic, but not dopaminergic, receptor activation supports intrinsic persistent firing, and that this firing is significantly stronger in corticocollicular neurons. Combined with previous reports, these results indicate that cholinergic modulation exerts a similar supportive role for intrinsic
> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.03.722484 doi: bioRxiv preprint 4persistent firing in the AC, PFC and the hippocampus. In contrast, the effect of NA on persistent firing in the AC differs from that in the hippocampus, while the effect of DA in the AC differs from that in the PFC. We further discuss the functional implications of these findings for maintaining sensory information under conditions of  stress and reward. Together, these findings suggest that neuromodulation of intrinsic persistent firing may serve as a source of both state- and region-specific regulation of brain function.
> Methods
> In Vitro Patch Clamp Recording:  All experimental protocols were approved by the Ethical Committee on Animal Health and Care of Saxony-Anhalt state, Germany (license number: 42502-2-1570  DZNE).  2-3  month  C57BL6  male  mice  were  deeply  anesthetized  with Isoflurane, assessed by the extinction of the pedal-withdrawal reflex, and decapitated. The brain was quickly removed from the skull and immersed in oxygenated ice-cold cutting solution containing (in mM) 110 Choline Cl, 7 MgCl2 (6H2O), 0.5 CaCl2, 2.5 KCl, 25 glucose, 1.2 NaH2PO4, 25 NaHCO3, 3 pyruvic acid, 11.5 ascorbic acid, and 100 D-Mannitol. Coronal brain slices (300 μm thick) were obtained with a vibrating-blade microtome (Leica VT1000S, Leica Biosystems, Wetzlar, Germany). Brain slices were then individually transferred to a holding chamber filled with normal ACSF (nACSF) containing (in mM) 126 NaCl, 1.2 NaH2PO4, 26 NaHCO3, 1.5 MgCl2, 1.6 CaCl2, 3 KCl, and 10 glucose. In this holding chamber, the slices were kept at 37 °C for 30 min and additionally for at least 30 min at room temperature before being used for recording. The pH of the cutting solution and nACSF were adjusted by a constant saturation with carbogen (95% O2/5% CO2). Brain slices were transferred to the recording chamber and continuously superfused with nACSF (~35 °C). The slice and cells were visualized with an uprig ht microscope (Zeiss Axioskop 2FS plus, Carl Zeiss Microscopy, Jena, Germany) equipped with a 4× objective lens, a 40× water-immersion objective lens, and a monochrome camera (WAT-902H Ultimate). The auditory cortex was targeted using the (4x) objective lens, and a 40x objective was used to identify layer 5. Patch pipettes (3–8 MΩ) obtained from borosilicate glass capillaries (Science Products), were pulled on a P-1000  horizontal puller (Sutter instruments). The pipettes were filled with filtered intracellular solution containing (in mM): 120 K-gluconate, 10 HEPES, 0.2 EGTA, 20 KCl, 2 MgCl2, 7 PhCreat di(tris), 4 Na2ATP, and 0.3 Tris-GTP (pH adjusted to 7.3 with KOH). For labeling purposes, biocytin was added into the intracellular solution at 0.1% concentration. The whole-cell patch configuration was achieved by forming tight seals (>1 GΩ) on the soma and rupturing the membrane with light negative pressure. Liquid junction potential was not corrected. The access resistance was compensated several times during the recordings. Electrical signals were amplified with a Multiclamp 700B amplifier (Axon Instruments, Fremont, CA, USA), low-pass filtered at 10 kHz and sampled at 20 kHz, and recorded using pClamp (Axon Instruments, Fremont, CA, USA).
> Biocytin staining:  To control for the anatomical location of recorded cells in layer V of the auditory cortex, biocytin staining was conducted. First, the brain slices were submerged in 4% PFA overnight before being transferred into 1X PBS. Within a month of being patched, the slices were transferred to a 24-well plate and washed 5x15 minutes in tris-buffered saline solution containing 0.5% Triton-X-100 (TBST-Tx, in mM: 153 NaCl, 50 Trizma Base, 0.5% Triton-X-100, pH adjusted to 8.0 using HCl). After this, the slices were incubated overnight on a tilting mixer, covered or wrapped in foil to avoid light exposure, at room temperature with streptavidin-conjugated Alexa
> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.03.722484 doi: bioRxiv preprint 5Fluor 647 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The following day, the slices were rinsed three times for 15 min each in TBST-Tx, and mounted on standard microscope slides with Mowiol. Slides were stored overnight at 4⁰ C, and imaged the next day using a Keyence (BZ-X710) fluorescent microscope.
> Measurements  and  data  analysis:  Measurement  of  persistent  firing  was  done  by depolarizing the cell to just below rheobase and applying a 2 s, 200 pA stimulus. Cells which continued firing for longer than three seconds after the end of the stimulus were considered to have persistent firing. Rheobase was determined prior to this protocol by slowly depolarizing a cell during a stimulus-free protocol and noting the point at which the cell fired an action potential. Persistent firing was classified as long-lasting if it continued longer than 30 s and short-lasting if it stopped before reaching 30 s. To quantify the strength of persistent firing, post-stimulus firing frequency and post-stimulus membrane potential were measured. Post-stimulus firing frequency was measured as the average firing rate of the cell during the 10 s period after the 2 s stimulus offset. Post-stimulus membrane potential was measured as the difference between the average membrane potential during the same 10 s period and the pre-stimulus baseline potential. Intrinsic electrophysiological properties were measured during two protocols. In the first protocol, the resting membrane potential of the cell (V rest ) was recorded without applying any current. After this, positive current was gradually applied until the cell was sufficiently depolarized to fire an action potential. Action potential amplitude, threshold, width at half-maximum, and maximum hyperpolarization speed were calculated from this action potential as described below using the scipy signal processing package (scipy.signal) in Python. Action potential amplitude was measured as the difference between the voltage measured at the action potential’s peak and the average baseline measurement in the 50 ms directly before and after the spike. The width at half maximum was measured as the amount of time between the rising and falling phase of the action potential, measured at half of the action potential’s amplitude. The threshold of the action potential was calculated using the maximum of the third derivative of the voltage data. This corresponds to the point of the action potential where the voltage is changing fastest (Henze & Buzsáki, 2001). The maximum hyperpolarization speed was measured as the minimum of the first derivative of the voltage data, or where the voltage is decreasing most quickly.
> In the second protocol (IV protocol), cells were held at a baseline membrane potential of -65 mV, and one-second-long square pulses were applied to the cell starting with -300 pA and increasing in 50 pA increments, ending with 400 pA. The input resistance was calculated by dividing the change in membrane potential resulting from the pulse by the amplitude of the pulse (-50 pA). Sag ratio was measured from the -300-pA pulse, and calculated by dividing the sag amplitude by the deflection of the membrane potential from baseline at peak sag current. Burst index was measured from the first trace with at least 10 action potentials in the IV protocol. In most of the cells, we observed no burst or a burst with two spikes (doublet) at the initial part of the current injection. In these cases, the burst index was calculated as the second inter-spike-interval divided by the first inter-spike-interval. In some cells, more than two action potentials occurred in a burst riding on the same depolarizing wave at a rate of 60 Hz or faster. In those cases, the burst ratio was calculated as the first non-burst inter-spike-interval divided by the average inter-spike-interval during the burst.
> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.03.722484 doi: bioRxiv preprint 6Adaptation ratio was also measured from the same trace with at least 10 action potentials in the IV protocol. In cells that had either no burst or a burst with only two spikes (doublet), the adaptation ratio was calculated as the ratio of the 9th and 2nd inter-spike intervals. In cells with a burst with more than 2 spikes, the last non-burst and second non-burst inter-spike-interval are used instead. In rare cases, it was not possible to calculate the adjusted adaptation ratio on the first trace with 10 action potentials, in which case the next trace with 50 pA more current injection was used.
> Labeling of C-Col and C-Cal cells:  In a subset of mice (n = 63), a retrograde tracer (100 nL green Lumafluor beads) was injected into either the contralateral primary auditory cortex (A1) or the ipsilateral inferior colliculus (IC) one week prior to patch-clamp recording. Mice were anesthetized with an intraperitoneal injection of a ketamine/xylazine mixture. After confirming the absence of a paw-pinch pedal reflex, the mice were fixed in a stereotaxic frame. Injection coordinates for the inferior colliculus (IC) were 1 mm posterior to lambda and 1 mm lateral, injection depth 0.75 mm (Joshi et al., 2015). Auditory cortex injection coordinates were 4 mm posterior to bregma and 4.5 mm lateral, injection depth 1 mm (Henschke et al., 2021). 100 nL of green Lumafluor retrograde tracing beads was injected through the craniotomy over the course of 10 minutes using a Hamilton syringe with a blunt metal needle (Hamilton 1701, I.D: 0.46 mm). The injection rate was controlled by a stereotaxic syringe pump (CHEMYX, NANOJET). After the injection was finished, the needle was left in place for an additional 5 minutes to allow the beads to disperse at the target location before being retracted. The minimum time between injection surgery and patch clamp experiments was two days, in accordance with manufacturer instructions. However, the majority of mice were used 7-12 days after surgery. After the recording, Lumafluor beads, along with the biocytin-labelled cell, were visualized on a Keyence fluorescence microscope (BZ-X710).
> Classification of cell types using support vector machine:  Based on the electrophysiological properties of labeled C-Col and C-Cal cells, we trained classifiers to assign non-labeled cells to these two groups. The classifiers were created in Python 3, using the scikit-learn library and tutorials. The following eight electrophysiological features from 60 C-Col and 62 C-Cal cells were used for the training: resistance, sag ratio, mAHP amplitude, V rest , maximum hyperpolarization speed, burst index, spike width at half maximum, sAHP amplitude, and adaptation ratio. Using the scikit-learn “pipeline” the features were first transformed to z-scores using the “StandardScaler” class, and then randomly divided into “train” (60%) and “test” (40%) groups. The training data was used to fit each classifier, and then the performance of the classifier was tested on the withheld 40% of labeled cells. We cross-validated the models using 10 random test-train sets to ensure that the outcomes were stable. Based  on  performance  and  task  suitability,  linear  SVM  was  chosen  as  the classification model and was implemented using the scikitlearn class “SVC” with a linear kernel. Because our classes were balanced, the “class-weight” parameter was not adjusted. The parameter “C” was reduced from  the default  setting (1) to 0.025, increasing the regularization to compensate for noise in the data and reduce the risk of overfitting. Other hyperparameters were not adjusted from the defaults provided by scikit-learn. The classifier was evaluated using the F1 score, which measures how well the model identifies members of a class correctly (precision), without excluding members of that class
> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.03.722484 doi: bioRxiv preprint 7(recall). The average F1 score over 10 cross-validation runs from the linear SVM classifier was 0.872 (SD = 0.077). Once trained, the model was “pickled” or serialized into a stable binary file, which could then be “unpickled” to run on a new dataset. In this way, the trained classifier was applied to unlabeled cells from other experiments. The model outputs a prediction of 1 or 2, corresponding to C-Cal and C-Col, respectively, along with additional information, such as the probability that the model assigned to each possible label. All  data  analysis  was  performed  using  custom-written  scripts  in  MATLAB (MathWorks) and Python.
> Results
> Cholinergic activation supports persistent firing in layer V AC cells
> While the cholinergic agonist carbachol (Cch) has been widely used to induce persistent activity in a variety of brain areas, evidence from AC cells is limited (Fu et al., 2019). Therefore, before testing NA and DA, we first examined whether Cch supports persistent activity using a bath application of 5 μM Cch in deep-layer AC cells. To evaluate the effects of Cch, we first tested persistent firing in the absence of Cch and then in its presence (5 μM). As in previous studies, persistent firing was tested from a
> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.03.722484 doi: bioRxiv preprint 8
> membrane potential just below the spike threshold (Knauer et al., 2013). We refer to this as the baseline membrane potential; testing from this level enables us to compare the ability of cells to generate persistent firing independently of the varying resting membrane potentials and spike thresholds across cells. To trigger persistent firing, we used a brief current injection (100 pA, 2 s; Fig. 1A and C). In the control condition (without Cch), cells responded with spiking only during the current stimulation (n = 9). Evaluation of persistent firing in the Cch condition was performed approximately 5 min after bath application of Cch in the same cells (n = 9). In contrast to the control condition, persistent firing was observed in all cells tested (Fig. 1B and C). Persistent firing was quantified by measuring the frequency and depolarization during the 10 s period immediately following the offset of the current injection, indicated by the line under the traces in Fig. 1A (see Methods for details of the quantification). The post-stimulus firing frequency, which ranged from ~5 to 35 Hz, was significantly higher, and the membrane depolarization during the persistent firing phase was significantly larger in Cch compared to the control condition, indicating a supportive effect of Cch on persistent firing (Fig. 1D and E). After this initial measurement, we repeated the protocol two more times in Cch to examine the consistency of persistent firing over time at approximately 10 and 15 min from the start of Cch application (Fig. 1F). The majority of cells (66.7 %) responded with persistent firing in all three attempts, while persistent firing was induced in two out of three attempts in the remaining cells (Fig. 1G). We further tested persistent firing across a range of concentrations of Cch (2.5, 5, and  10  μM;  Fig.  1H-K).  The percentage of cells that responded with persistent firing was lower at 2.5  μM  Cch  compared  to  higher concentrations  (Fig.  1H).  The average  frequency  and depolarization  of  persistent  firing increased from the lowest to the highest concentrations (Fig. 1I and J).  However,  there  were  no statistically  significant  differences among  the  concentrations.  The response consistency also increased with increasing Cch concentrations (Fig. 1K).
> Projection  of  catecholaminergic fibers to the auditory cortex
> Prior to testing the effects of NA and  DA  on  persistent  firing,  we investigated  whether  NA  and  DA fibers project to the AC in mice. Immunohistochemical staining (Fig. 2A-C) revealed that fibers positive for tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), the
> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.03.722484 doi: bioRxiv preprint 9rate-limiting enzyme for DA synthesis, are present in the AC (cyan stars in Fig. 2C top row, n = 3 mice). In addition, some TH+ fibers in the AC co-express DA β-hydroxylase (DBH), the enzyme responsible for converting DA to NA (pink triangles in Fig. 2C middle row, n = 2 mice). Together, these findings indicate that both DA- and NA-releasing fibers are present in the AC.
> Noradrenergic activations support persistent firing
> Next, we tested the effect of NA on the induction of persistent firing (n = 13). While persistent firing was not observed in the control condition, it was present in 54% of cells in 10 μM NA (Fig. 3A and B). The significantly higher firing frequency and membrane depolarization in NA relative to the control indicate a supportive effect of NA on persistent firing, similar to the action of Cch (Fig. 3C-E). Persistent firing was tested two additional times during the continued application of NA in each cell (Fig. 3F). At this concentration of NA, persistent firing was consistently observed (three out of three attempts) in only 38% of cells (5 out of 13), which was lower than the proportion observed in the Cch condition (Fig. 3G). We further tested persistent firing across a range of concentrations of NA (3, 10, 30,
> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.03.722484 doi: bioRxiv preprint 10 and 100 μM). The percentage of cells that responded with persistent firing was lower at the lowest concentration (3.0 μM NA) compared to the higher concentrations (Fig. 3H). While average frequency and depolarization of persistent firing increased from the lowest to the higher concentrations (Fig. 3I), there were no statistically significant differences between them. The response consistency was lower in NA than in Cch even at the highest NA concentration (100 μM; Fig. 3K), suggesting that the relatively weaker effect of NA on persistent firing is not due to a lower potency or insufficient concentration of the drug.
> Cooperative action of NA and Cch on persistent activity
> In  in  vivo  conditions,  both  cholinergic  and  noradrenergic  neuromodulation  can  be simultaneously active, potentially playing complementary roles in arousal, attention, and working  memory.  Therefore,  we  investigated  whether  NA  and  carbachol  (Cch)  can synergistically enhance persistent firing. First, we recorded persistent firing in 10 μM NA and subsequently in a combination of 10 μM NA and 2.5 μM Cch in the same cells (n = 20, Fig. 4A and B). A higher percentage of cells exhibited persistent firing in the combined condition compared to the NA condition (Fig. 4C), and the persistent firing was, in general, stronger. The post-stimulus firing frequency was higher, and the depolarization was more pronounced in the combined condition (Fig. 4D and E). We also tested the reverse application order. Persistent firing was initially tested in 2.5 μM Cch, followed by the addition of 10 μM NA to the same cells. The percentage of cells exhibiting persistent firing increased (Fig. 4F), and persistent firing was stronger in the combined condition (Fig. 4G). The depolarization showed a trend to be higher in the combined condition (Fig. 4H). The cells used in this experiment came from a population of labeled C-Col and C-Cal
> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.03.722484 doi: bioRxiv preprint 11 cells. While comparison of persistent firing in these two groups of cells are done in Fig. 8 in Cch and NA conditions separately, we did not compare persistent firing in these two types of cells in the combined condition (Cch + NA) due to the limited number of cells tested. In summary, these results indicate that cholinergic and noradrenergic modulations are not occlusive and can act together to enhance intrinsic persistent firing.
> Dopamine does not strongly support or modulate persistent firing in auditory cortex
> Dopaminergic modulation has been shown to improve working memory performance and enhance the signal-to-noise ratio of PFC activity by suppressing persistent firing in “off-target” cells (Vijayraghavan et al., 2007). The suppressive effect of DA on intrinsic persistent firing  in vitro  has also been shown in PFC cells  (Lançon et al., 2021; Sidiropoulou et al., 2009). However, the effect of DA on intrinsic persistent firing in auditory cortex cells remains unknown. While the effects of bath-applied DA on cells in the substantia nigra can be detected at concentrations as low as 100 nM and reach saturation at 10 μM (Philippart & Khaliq, 2018), other studies have used concentrations in the 30 μM to 50 μM range in the entorhinal (Caruana & Chapman, 2008) and prefrontal cortex (Otani et al., 2015). We therefore first tested the application of 30 μM DA in nine auditory cortex cells (Fig. 5A and B).  Because DA oxidizes easily in solution, we used anti-oxidant sodium metabisulfite (50 μM), and stored the freshly prepared DA solution in low-light conditions. While none of the cells we tested responded with persistent firing in the control condition without DA, two of them responded with persistent firing ~5 min after DA application (Fig. 5C). The frequency of persistent firing was not significantly different between the control and DA conditions (Fig. 5D), while the membrane potential following the stimulus increased slightly but significantly (Fig. 5E). This significant increase in membrane potential without persistent firing could reflect a decreased amplitude of the mAHP (Pedarzani & Storm, 1995). In seven of these nine cells, we tested persistent firing twice more over the following ~15 min (Fig. 5F and G). The two cells that responded with persistent firing in the first test failed to do so in subsequent tests, suggesting an unreliable or transient effect of DA (Fig. 5F). We next tested whether DA can modulate persistent firing in the presence of the cholinergic  agonist  Cch.  Because  we  expected  that  DA  might  suppress  Cch-induced persistent firing, and having observed that persistent firing gradually decreased over time in some cells during recording in Cch (Fig. 1F), we decided to compare persistent firing in Cch-alone and Cch+DA conditions in two different groups of cells at the same time point (~5 min) after the start of drug application. Compared to the Cch (2.5 μM) condition, more cells responded with persistent firing in the Cch+DA (30 μM) condition (Fig. 5J; 2.5 μM Cch = 66.7% vs. 2.5 μM Cch + 30 μM DA = 100%). However, this effect was not statistically significant (Fisher’s exact test, p = 0.22). The frequency of persistent firing and post-stimulus depolarization did not differ significantly (Fig. 5K and L). Figs. 5M and N show measurements of persistent firing frequency from all cells at different time points (~5, ~10, and ~15 min). The response consistency was higher in the Cch+DA condition (Fig. 5O). The effect of DA on Cch-induced persistent firing was further assessed using a higher concentration of Cch (10 μM) in additional cells using the same experimental design (Fig. 5P-U). Neither the persistent firing frequency (Fig. 5Q) nor the post-stimulus depolarization level (Fig. 5R) differed between the two conditions. Overall, despite the innervation of the auditory cortex by tyrosine hydroxylase-positive fibers, the effects of DA on L5 pyramidal cells resulted in, at most, modest increases in post-stimulus depolarization, and we did not
> was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.03.722484 doi: bioRxiv preprint 12 observe the suppressive effect expected based on results from the PFC.

was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 4, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.05.03.722484 doi: bioRxiv preprint 13