Title: Structure-function coupling in the human brainstem

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 34

Markdown Content:
# Structure-function coupling in the human brainstem 

Asa Farahani 1α, Subhranil Koley 2,3α, Justine Y. Hansen 4α, María Guadalupe García-Gomar 2,5,Kavita Singh 6,7, Simone Cauzzo 2,8, Firdaus Fabrice Hannanu 2, Filip Milisav 1,Zhen-Qi Liu 1, Vincent Bazinet 1, Marta Bianciardi 2,3ω ,∗ and Bratislav Misic 1ω †

> 1

Montréal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada  

> 2

Brainstem Imaging Laboratory, Department of Radiology, Athinoula A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA 

> 3

Division of Sleep Medicine, Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA 

> 4

Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia and University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA 

> 5

Escuela Nacional de Estudios Superiores Unidad Juriquilla, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Querétaro, Mexico 

> 6

Department of Radiology and Bioengineering, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD 20814 , USA 

> 7

Henry M. Jackson Foundation for the Advancement of Military Medicine, Inc., Bethesda, MD 20814 , USA 

> 8

Parkinson’s Disease and Movement Disorders Unit, Center for Rare Neurological Diseases (ERN-RND), Department of Neurosciences, University of Padova, Padova, Italy and 

> α

These authors contributed equally to this work.  

> ω

These authors contributed equally to this work. 

The nuclei of the brainstem fundamentally modulate neuronal activity throughout the central nervous system. Yet connectome reconstructions typically do not include the brainstem because it is notoriously difficult to image. As a result, the influence of the brainstem on structure-function coupling in the brain is unknown. Here we use high-resolution 7 Tesla magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to reconstruct structural and functional brain connectomes encompassing cortex and 58 brainstem nuclei spanning the midbrain, pons, and medulla. We identify structural connectional profiles of individual brainstem nuclei to the cortex and find that they align with a spectrum of functions, spanning sensory and motor processing to higher-order cognition. Structural and functional connectivity in brainstem-augmented connectomes are positively correlated, and pairs of regions with direct anatomical projections display greater functional connectivity than pairs without. Structure-function coupling is heterogeneous across brainstem nuclei, with greatest coupling in both modulatory and relay nuclei. Collectively, this work presents an initial step towards understanding how the brainstem shapes structure-function relation-ships in the brain. 

INTRODUCTION 

Anatomical projections between neuronal populations promote synchrony and the emergence of patterned neu-ral activity. This structure-function relationship can be measured in vivo using techniques such as diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and func-tional MRI. Early studies emphasized global relationships between structural and functional connectivity 1–7 , while more recent studies have found that structure-function coupling is also spatially heterogeneous 8–12 . Despite improvements in acquisition, preprocessing, and sam-ple size, most extant studies focus on cortical structure-function coupling, excluding the contributions of the brainstem. Exclusion of brainstem from these studies is partly attributable to technical difficulties associated with imaging deep brain structures. These difficulties include the presence of physiological noise and motion artifacts arising from large vasculature and cerebrospinal fluid flow surrounding the deep structures, susceptibility-related signal dropout, and challenges in parcellating   

> ∗martab@mgh.harvard.edu
> †bratislav.misic@mcgill.ca

small brainstem nuclei in low-resolution MR images 13–22 .Nevertheless, brainstem nuclei modulate the relationship between cortical structure and function via direct and indirect neuronal projections and diffuse neurotransmit-ter release 23–29 . Hence, including the brainstem and its connections is necessary to capture a complete picture of brain-wide structure-function coupling 10 .Recent technical and analytical advances make it in-creasingly possible to image brainstem nuclei in vivo 

and include them in connectome reconstructions. These include ultra-high-field MRI 30–32 , advanced image ac-quisition techniques 31,33,34 , and brainstem-specific pre-processing pipelines designed to eliminate physiologi-cal noise 35–37 . Concurrent development of in vivo at-lases of brainstem nuclei in stereotactic space provides an anatomical reference for brainstem imaging 38–43 . To-gether, these advances have enabled a shift from recon-structing specific brainstem fiber bundles with limited and predefined brainstem seeds and cortical targets 44,45 

and studying pathways involved in specific circuitry (e.g., pain circuitry 46 ), toward reconstructing large-scale networks of structural and functional connectivity that span multiple brainstem nuclei and encompass nearly the entire cortex and subcortex 47,48 .Here we use high-resolution diffusion-weighted and resting-state functional MRI acquired at 7 Tesla in 19 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2healthy adults to reconstruct large-scale structural and functional networks spanning 58 brainstem nuclei and the cerebral cortex. We characterize the organization of structural connectivity between brainstem and cortex, examine nucleus-specific cortical connectivity profiles, and assess the correspondence between structural and functional connectivity within and between the brain-stem and cortex. Using regression models that control for inter-regional distance and regional volume, we eval-uate whether structural connectivity explains variance in functional connectivity beyond geometric constraints. Together, these analyses provide a quantitative assess-ment of structure-function coupling involving the human brainstem. 

> RESULTS

Structural connectivity of the cortex and the brainstem is estimated using diffusion-weighted MR images acquired on a 7 Tesla scanner from 19 unrelated healthy par-ticipants (mean ± SE age: 29 .0 ± 5 years; 10 males, 

9 females). Structural connections are defined based on specified cortical and brainstem regions (see Meth-ods for details on data acquisition, data preprocessing, and structural network reconstruction). Cortical re-gions are defined according to the 400 regions in the Schaefer parcellation 52 , and brainstem nuclei are de-fined according to the 58 nuclei in the Brainstem Navi-gator atlas (Table. S1, 50 bilateral and eight midline nu-clei; atlas available at https://www.nitrc.org/projects/ brainstemnavig) 38–43 .

> Structural connectivity of brainstem and cortex

Fig. 1a shows the group-consensus structural connectiv-ity (SC) matrix derived from diffusion-weighted imag-ing. The consensus structural connectivity matrix is con-structed using an edge consistency- and length-based thresholding approach (see Methods )58 . Structural con-nections within brainstem and within cortex are stronger than structural connections between brainstem and cor-tex (two-tailed, pperm = 9 .99 × 10 −4, Nperm = 1 000 ,Fig. 1b). Fig. S1 shows the inter-subject variability of the structural connectome. Overall, structural connectivity patterns between brainstem and cortex exhibit greater inter-subject variability compared to within-brainstem and within-cortex structural connectivity patterns. With the consensus structural connectivity in place, the first question we ask is which brainstem nuclei are most strongly connected to cortex, and which corti-cal regions are most strongly connected to brainstem? Throughout the manuscript, we refer to the connectiv-ity profile of individual brainstem nuclei with cortex as “brainstem-to-cortex” connectivity and vice versa as “cortex-to-brainstem” connectivity. The overall struc-tural connectivity of each brainstem nucleus to cortex is quantified as the sum of SC values across all cortical regions (“weighted degree”) (Fig. 1c). When brainstem nuclei are ranked by weighted degree, the substantia ni-gra, mesencephalic reticular formation, raphe pallidus, ventral tegmental area, and inferior olivary nucleus are among the nuclei with the highest connectivity to cortex (brainstem-to-cortex hubs). Given that brainstem nuclei vary in regional volume, we further remove the voxel-count effect from the weighted degree and find that the ranking of nuclei is largely preserved (Fig. S2). The overall structural connectivity of each cortical region to brainstem is quantified as the sum of SC values across all brainstem nuclei (“weighted degree”) (Fig. 1d). Cortical connectivity to brainstem is concentrated in primary mo-tor cortex (cortex-to-brainstem hubs). To further char-acterize this selective connectivity pattern, we compute mean cortex-to-brainstem weighted degree within each cortical cytoarchitectural class defined by the histological von Economo atlas (Fig. S3) 49–51 . This analysis confirms a significant enrichment of cortex-to-brainstem struc-tural connectivity within the primary motor cytoarchi-tectonic class (two-tailed, pspin = 1 .998 × 10 −3, Nspin =1 000 ; Fig. 1e). In Fig. S5, we also show the subcortical regions to brainstem nuclei structural connectivity. The brainstem is strongly structurally connected to the tha-lamus proper and hypothalamus. The accumbens area is the region with the weakest structural connectivity to brainstem. 

> Connection profiles of brainstem nuclei and cortical functional specialization

In the previous section we considered global connectivity profiles, aggregated over all cortical or brainstem nodes. Here we also examine the connectivity profiles of individ-ual brainstem nuclei with cortex. To account for both di-rect monosynaptic and indirect polysynaptic influences, we estimate the weighted communicability of brainstem nuclei to cortex. Communicability between two nodes is defined as the weighted sum of all paths and walks between those nodes 59–61 . Cortical connectivity patterns vary across brainstem nuclei, not only in the amount of overall connection strength but also in the spatial distri-bution of dominant cortical targets. Fig. 2a shows cor-tical structural communicability patterns for three nu-clei including the superior colliculus, raphe pallidus, and ventral tegmental area (averaged pattern across left and right nuclei for superior colliculus and ventral tegmental area). We specifically focus on these three examples be-cause prior animal work consistently demonstrates their distinct anatomical connectivity and functional special-ization. The superior colliculus is connected to visual areas and has a role in visually guided behavior 62–65 .The raphe pallidus has diffuse connections to motor and sensory regions and has a role in motor and sensory regulation 66 . The ventral tegmental area is connected to frontal cortex and has roles in positive and negative rein-

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

Figure 1. Structural connectivity of brainstem and cortex | (a) Group-consensus weighted structural connectivity (SC) matrix (58 brainstem nuclei and 400 cortical regions, 458 regions × 458 regions). The green triangle highlights the brainstem to brain-stem connections, the blue rectangle highlights the connections between cortex and brainstem, and the pink triangle highlights the cortex to cortex connections. (b) Density distributions of non-zero structural connectivity edges within brainstem (green dots), between brainstem and cortex (blue dots), and within cortex (pink dots). Structural connections within brainstem are stronger than structural connections between brainstem and cortex (two-tailed, pperm = 9 .99 × 10 −4, Nperm = 1 000 ). Structural connec-tions within cortex are also stronger than structural connections between brainstem and cortex (two-tailed, pperm = 9 .99 × 10 −4,

Nperm = 1 000 ). (c) Brainstem-to-cortex weighted degree is calculated by summing the structural connectivity of each brainstem nucleus across all cortical regions. Sagittal and coronal views of brainstem nuclei are shown. Node sizes are proportional to the number of voxels per brainstem nucleus, and node colors reflect weighted degree. To test whether brainstem nuclei hubness rank-ings depend on differences in volume, we regressed out the voxel-count effect from the weighted degree—the ranking of nuclei is largely preserved, suggesting that hubness is not driven by volume (Fig. S2). (d) Cortex-to-brainstem weighted degree is calculated by summing the structural connectivity of each cortical region across all brainstem nuclei. Brain cortical maps are displayed on fs-LR midthickness surfaces. (e) Cortex-to-brainstem weighted degree binned according to the seven cytoarchitectonic classes defined by von Economo (Fig. S3) 49–51 . Each dot represents a cortical region defined according to the Schaefer-400 parcellation 52 . The brainstem shows strong structural connectivity with the primary motor cortex (two-tailed, pspin = 1 .998 × 10 −3, Nspin = 1 000 ). For completeness, we also show the cortex-to-cortex weighted degree in Fig. S4. 

forcement, decision making, and working memory 67–70 .Indeed, superior colliculus exhibits structural communi-cability with visual cortical regions, whereas raphe pal-lidus exhibits structural communicability with the mo-tor and the frontal cortical regions and ventral tegmental area exhibits structural communicability with the frontal cortical regions. Together, these findings show heteroge-neous, nucleus-specific cortical targeting patterns across the brainstem. We pursue this idea further and ask whether connec-tions between brainstem nuclei and cortex differentiate classes of sensory, motor and cognitive functions. We cross-correlate the cortex-to-brainstem structural com-municability pattern of each brainstem nucleus with the cortical maps from the Neurosynth meta-analytic atlas 53,71 (Fig. 2b). This analysis links the heterogene-ity in brainstem nuclei structural connectivity to func-tional specialization of the nuclei. Structural communi-cability patterns for nuclei including superior colliculus and inferior colliculus show spatial correspondence with Neurosynth maps associated with visual and oculomotor functions, including “imagery” and “fixation”. Structural communicability patterns for nuclei including cuneiform nucleus, isthmic reticular formation, raphe pallidus, and pedunculotegmental nucleus show strong spatial corre-spondence with Neurosynth maps associated with motor 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

Figure 2. Connection profiles of brainstem nuclei | (a) Structural communicability between selected brainstem nuclei and cortex. Cortical maps are displayed on fs-LR midthickness surfaces. (b) The heatmap visualizes Spearman correlation values (ρ) between structural communicability pattern of each nucleus and Neurosynth meta-analytic cortical maps. Neurosynth func-tional/cognitive terms for which at least one nucleus exhibited a positive correlation exceeding thresholds derived from spatial autocorrelation–preserving permutation nulls are shown on the x-axis ( pspin < 0.05 , Nspin = 1 000 ). Bold nucleus names denote nuclei whose cortical communicability patterns are shown in panel (a). Communicability patterns are averaged to obtain a single map for each pair of bilateral nuclei. A list of the 123 Neurosynth terms from the Cognitive Atlas 53,54 is provided in Table. S2. 

functions, including “movement”, “motor control”, and “coordination”. Structural communicability patterns for nuclei including ventral tegmental area and red nucleus (subregion 1) show spatial correspondence with Neu-rosynth maps associated with higher-level cognition, in-cluding “inhibition”, “monitoring”, and “interference”. 

Structure-function coupling in brainstem-augmented connectomes 

In the final two sections we assess structure-function cou-pling in connectomes that include the brainstem. In addi-tion to the diffusion–weighted MRI data described above, we analyze resting-state functional MRI (fMRI) acquired on the same 7 Tesla MR scanner (see Methods for details on fMRI data acquisition, data preprocessing, and func-tional network reconstruction). A detailed characteriza-tion of brainstem functional connectivity is discussed in a previous report from our group 48 . Here, we aim to characterize the correspondence between structural and functional connectivity between brainstem and cortex, and within the brainstem. Fig. 3a shows the group-consensus weighted SC and group-averaged functional connectivity (FC) matrices. Structure-function correspondence is quantified sepa-rately within three anatomically defined network com-partments: within brainstem, between brainstem and cortex, and within cortex. For each compartment, structure-function coupling is defined as the Spearman correlation between corresponding structural and func-tional edge weights. Structure-function coupling is weaker for connections between brainstem and cortex (ρ = 0 .12 , prewired = 9 .99 × 10 −4, Nrewired = 1 000 )

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

Figure 3. Brainstem structural connectivity supports its functional connectivity | (a) Group-consensus weighted structural connectivity matrix (top) and group-averaged functional connectivity matrix (bottom) spanning 58 brainstem nuclei and 400 corti-cal regions ( 458 regions × 458 regions). (b) Brainstem-cortex functional connectivity is stronger for structurally connected region pairs than for not-connected pairs. (c) Brainstem-brainstem functional connectivity is also stronger for structurally connected nu-clei than for anatomically not-connected nuclei. For both (b) and (c), statistical significance of the difference in mean functional connectivity between connected and not-connected region pairs is assessed against a null distribution of differences ( ∆FC) gen-erated when degree- and edge length-preserving rewired structural networks ( Nrewired = 1 000 ) are used to define anatomical connectivity 55 (see Fig. S7). For completeness, in Fig. S8 we show that cortex-cortex functional connectivity is stronger for struc-turally connected region pairs than for not-connected pairs, consistent with previous reports 3,56 .

compared to connections within brainstem ( ρ = 0 .42 ,

prewired = 9 .99 × 10 −4, Nrewired = 1 000 ) and connec-tions within cortex ( ρ = 0 .32 , prewired = 9 .99 × 10 −4,

Nrewired = 1 000 ) (Fig. S6c). At the individual level, inter-subject structure-function coupling shows a similar pattern, with weaker coupling for brainstem-cortex con-nections and stronger coupling for connections within the brainstem and within the cortex (Fig. S6d). Next, we examine whether the existence of direct anatomical projections is associated with stronger func-tional connectivity between brainstem and cortex, and within brainstem. We estimate the difference in func-tional connectivity between region pairs that are anatom-ically connected (SC ̸ = 0) and those that are not (SC = 0). To assess the statistical significance of these differences, we generate 1 000 degree- and edge-length–preserving rewired structural networks and use them to construct null distributions for the differences in mean functional connectivity between anatomically connected and non-connected region pairs. In both the brainstem-cortex and brainstem–brainstem compart-ments, the empirical differences in mean functional con-nectivity exceeded those expected under the null hypoth-esis (two-sided, prewired = 0 .034 , prewired = 0 .036 , re-spectively). These results indicate that regions linked by direct anatomical projections exhibit significantly stronger functional coupling than regions lacking such structural connections (Fig. 3b,c). Before examining the correspondence between struc-tural and functional connectivity of brainstem in de-tail, we assess how structural and functional connectivity strength is linked to the Euclidean distance between seed and target regions and to the volume of seed and target regions. Increased inter-regional distance between seed and target regions is accompanied with weaker struc-tural connections (within cortex: ρ = −0.55 , p ≈ 0;within brainstem: ρ = −0.16 , p = 1.94 × 10 −6; be-tween brainstem and cortex: ρ = −0.05 , p = 0.01 ). Larger regional volume of seed and target (target num-ber of voxels × seed number of voxels) is accompanied 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

Figure 4. Structure-function coupling in brainstem nuclei | (a) The two leftmost heatmaps show resting-state functional connec-tivity (FC) and structural communicability between brainstem nuclei and cortical regions. The third heatmap shows the Euclidean distance between each brainstem nucleus and each cortical region. The fourth heatmap shows the product of the number of voxels in each brainstem nucleus and each cortical region, providing an estimate of their combined volumetric size. We construct two regression models to predict the FC profile of each brainstem nucleus with cortical regions. The baseline model includes distance and volume regressors and the extended model includes distance, volume and structural communicability profile of the nucleus as regressors. In the scatter plot, baseline model R2 values are shown on the x−axis and extended model R2 values are shown on the y−axis. Each dot in the scatter plot corresponds to a brainstem nucleus. We assess the significance of improvement in model performance ( ∆R2) by comparing the empirical ∆R2 value to a null distribution of ∆R2 values obtained from models in which structural communicability is replaced by a communicability matrix that is obtained from degree- and length-preserving null structural networks. Brainstem nuclei showing a significant increase in R2 when empirical structural communicability is included in the model are shown in pink. (b) For each brainstem nucleus, the contributions of distance, volume and structural communica-bility to FC prediction ( R2) are shown (quantified using the dominance analysis 57 ). The nuclei written in bold are the ones that show a significant increase in R2 when empirical structural communicability is included. (c) The ∆R2 values for brainstem nuclei are mapped onto the sagittal and coronal views of the brainstem. The ventral tegmental area shows a marked improvement in FC prediction following the inclusion of structural communicability in the model (see Fig. S11). (d) Dopaminergic nuclei exhibit larger 

∆R2 values, indicating stronger structure–function coupling beyond geometric constraints (inter-regional distance and volume of target and seed regions) ( pperm = 1 .99 × 10 −3, Nperm = 1 000 ). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7with stronger structural connectivity, particularly within brainstem ( ρ = 0 .37 , p = 9 .89 × 10 −29 ) and between brainstem and cortex ( ρ = 0 .25 , p = 2 .32 ×10 −36 ) (within cortex: ρ = 0 .03 , p = 5 .53 × 10 −5) (Fig. S9). Increased inter-regional distance between seed and target regions is also accompanied with weaker functional connections particularly within the cortex ( ρ = −0.30 , p ≈ 0) and within the brainstem ( ρ = −0.11 , p = 1 .56 × 10 −5). Larger regional volume of seed and target (target num-ber of voxels × seed number of voxels) is accompanied with stronger functional connectivity, particularly within the brainstem ( ρ = 0 .65 , p ≈ 0) and between the brain-stem and cortex ( ρ = 0 .60 , p ≈ 0) (within the cortex: 

ρ = −0.01 , p = 2 .99 × 10 −4) (Fig. S10). 

> Structure-function coupling in brainstem nuclei

Finally, we ask how structure-function coupling differs for individual brainstem nuclei. Given that both inter-regional distance between seed and target and their re-gional volume affect structural and functional connec-tivity between seed and target regions, correspondence between SC and FC of two regions may arise from the regional geometric features. Therefore, for each brain-stem nucleus, to assess whether SC patterns explain any variance in FC patterns beyond geometric features, we compare two predictive models of FC: a baseline regres-sion model including only inter-regional distance and re-gional volume (defined as the product of seed and tar-get voxel counts), and an extended regression model that further incorporated SC communicability weights (Fig. 4a, left). To evaluate the specificity of SC contri-butions, we construct 1 000 null SC networks with pre-served degree- and edge-length distributions, and refit the extended model using each null network. We com-pare improvement in model fit using the empirical SC, relative to improvement in model fit when null networks are used. Incorporating structural connectivity between cortex and brainstem nuclei improves prediction of functional connectivity above what can be solely explained by geo-metric features in 15 out of 58 brainstem nuclei (Fig. 4a, right). These nuclei include both slow-acting modulatory nuclei (such as dopaminergic ventral tegmental area and serotonergic raphe nuclei), as well as faster-acting relay nuclei (inferior olive, superior colliculus, red nucleus) (Fig. 4b,c), consistent with the notion that cortical func-tional connectivity is shaped by both fast sensory-motor signaling and neuromodulation 72 . The contribution of dopaminergic nuclei is particularly noteworthy (ventral tegmental area and substantia nigra; Fig. 4d), consistent with the hypothesized contribution of dopaminergic sig-naling to a wide spectrum of cognitive functions 73 .For completeness, we also investigate the correspon-dence between structural and functional connectivity within individual brainstem nuclei. To assess whether brainstem SC explains any variance in brainstem FC of specific nuclei beyond geometric features, we apply the same modeling framework described above and compare two predictive models of FC: a baseline model including only inter-regional distance and regional volume, and an extended model that additionally incorporates SC com-municability weights (Fig. S12a). Relative to degree-and length-preserving null models, empirical SC signif-icantly improves FC prediction in 19 of 58 brainstem nu-clei (Fig. S12b). The greatest correspondence is observed in a similar set of nuclei reported above (that made the greatest contribution to global structure-function cou-pling; Fig. S13), including ventral tegmental area, sub-stantia nigra, several midline raphe nuclei, as well as im-portant midbrain hubs such as the periaqueductal gray and mesencephalic reticular formation, involved in inte-gration and arousal, respectively 74 .

> DISCUSSION

In the present report, we use high-resolution diffusion-weighted and resting-state functional MRI data acquired using a 7 Tesla scanner together with a comprehensive brainstem atlas of 58 nuclei, to reconstruct a brainstem-augmented structural connectome and to examine the correspondence between structural and functional con-nectomes beyond the cerebral cortex. We identify con-nectional profiles of individual brainstem nuclei to the cortex and find that they align with a spectrum of func-tions, spanning sensory and motor processing to higher-order cognition. Finally, we characterize structure-function coupling in brainstem-augmented connectomes and study the contribution of the structural network em-bedding of individual nuclei to the emergence of inter-regional functional connectivity. The study of human brainstem organization and its connections is historically based on ex vivo histological and fiber-dissection studies 75,76 , and is further guided by animal experiments 77–86 . These experiments have pro-vided qualitative insights into brainstem anatomical con-nectivity. Methodological heterogeneity of these stud-ies makes cross-study comparison challenging and pre-cludes their integration into a unified, quantitative struc-tural connectivity matrix 87 . Recent advances in MR imaging have enabled in vivo structural imaging of the brainstem through the use of higher-strength scanners and sequences with contrasts that reveal borders of the small brainstem nuclei 31,38,88 . In a move toward quan-titative, brainstem-augmented structural connectomes, earlier diffusion MRI studies have reconstructed major brainstem tracts 44 , or have visualized known pathways by defining specific brainstem nuclei and cortical seed regions. Here we build on these efforts by integrat-ing brainstem nuclei into whole-brain structural connec-tomes using high-resolution diffusion MRI 47,89 .We find that the brainstem connects to a wide va-riety of cortical regions and systems. The prominent 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8anatomical connectivity between brainstem and motor cortex is expected, as the precentral gyrus gives rise to bilateral corticofugal pathways, including corticoreticu-lar, corticorubral, and corticopontine tracts that termi-nate in brainstem nuclei, as well as the corticospinal tract that descends through the brainstem toward the spinal cord 78,90–92 . The connectivity of brainstem and motor cortex further reflects hard-wired, evolutionary conserved motor pathways 93–95 . In addition, nuclei such as ventral tegmental area and substantia nigra are con-nected with frontal 80,96–98 and somatomotor cortex 97,98 

and modulate their activity by dopaminergic signaling. These connections align with known mesocortical and ni-grocortical dopaminergic pathways, possibly underlying processes such as inhibition control, performance moni-toring and the integration of motor and cognitive infor-mation. Furthermore, connectivity with sensory and vi-sual cortical areas is driven by nuclei such as superior col-liculus that connect directly and indirectly with primary and extrastriate visual cortex (corticotectal tracts) 99,100 .White matter connections of the brainstem shape the emergence of functional connectivity. Structural and functional connectivity are positively correlated, and pairs of regions with direct anatomical projections dis-play greater functional connectivity than pairs with-out. Structure-function coupling among brainstem nu-clei is greater in magnitude than brainstem to cortex coupling, both at the group and individual participant level. This gradient suggests a hierarchical organiza-tion in which within brainstem circuits are strongly con-strained by direct anatomical connections, while long-range brainstem-cortex projections operate in a diffuse modulatory and polysynaptic way with weaker SC–FC correspondence. Importantly, structure-function cou-pling is heterogeneous across brainstem nuclei. The greatest contributions are from a variety of modulatory and relay nuclei, associated with a variety of sensory-motor (e.g., superior colliculus, red nucleus, and infe-rior olive) and cognitive functions (e.g., ventral tegmen-tal area, laterodorsal tegmental nucleus, and raphe nu-clei), consistent with the idea that resting functional connectivity reflects the superposition of communica-tion patterns originating from multiple circuits and systems 101,102 .Although brainstem-cortex structure-function cou-pling was lower overall than within the brainstem, sev-eral nuclei—including the ventral tegmental area, raphe nuclei, laterodorsal tegmental nucleus, superior collicu-lus, inferior olive, and red nucleus—exhibited compara-tively stronger coupling with cortical regions. These nu-clei participate in organized ascending neuromodulatory and sensorimotor integration pathways, suggesting that SC–FC correspondence is higher when projections are functionally specific and embedded in structured loops. This indicates that coupling is not uniform but depends on the functional architecture of the underlying circuit. Collectively, these results contribute to an emerging lit-erature on structure-function coupling in the brain that is at present largely cortico-centric 1,3,4,7,9–11,103–111 .Brainstem-augmented structural connectomes have implications for developing computational biophysical models that simulate brain dynamics, and for under-standing the anatomical foundations of cortical func-tional organization 112–116 . In such models, the structural connectome provides the anatomical scaffold that cou-ples local neural population dynamics across distributed brain regions and constrains the propagation of neu-ronal activity. However, current models typically ignore the contribution of brainstem connectivity to simulated dynamics, despite the fact that brainstem nuclei exert considerable modulatory influence on whole-brain dy-namics via neurotransmitters 24,29,66,117–122 . These neu-romodulators are transmitted via long-range axonal pro-jections to distributed cortical and subcortical brain re-gions, where they excite, inhibit or change the gain of post-synaptic neurons 72,123 . These adjustments in post-synaptic activity alter how signals are routed through the structural network of the brain, and ultimately how they are integrated 10 . We therefore envisage that increasingly accurate and biologically grounded modeling of neural dynamics will benefit from inclusion of widespread and heterogeneous structural connectivity profiles of brain-stem nuclei into biophysical models. In a similar vein, brainstem-augmented structural con-nectomes provide a field of view beyond the cerebral cor-tex for investigating network spreading mechanisms in neurodegenerative diseases 124 . A growing body of ev-idence supports the existence, aggregation and region-to-region propagation of misfolded proteins in diseases such as Parkinson’s disease (PD) 125–129 , multiple sys-tem atrophy (MSA) 130,131 , Alzheimer’s disease (AD) 132 ,frontotemporal dementia (FTD) 133 , and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) 134,135 . Prion-like spreading of misfolded proteins along anatomical connections facil-itates the spread of pathology from initial disease epi-centers to anatomically distal regions 136–140 . Recently-developed models of disease pathological spread, such as susceptible–infected–removed 126,133,135,141 , stochastic epidemic spreading models 142 , and diffusion models 143 

use structural connectomes to explain and forecast 

in vivo disease pathology 144 . Postmortem studies have shown that the brainstem is among the most severely affected structures in neurodegenerative dis-eases such as PD and ALS, and exhibits substantial amounts of misfolded-protein aggregates 145–150 . Incor-porating brainstem-augmented structural connectomes into spreading models should enable more biologically realistic simulations of disease progression and pro-vide a framework for understanding how brainstem nu-clei and their anatomical connections shape pathology-specific trajectories across disease stages. Even in pri-marily supratentorial-dominated diseases, such as AD and FTD, brainstem-augmented connectomes could en-able the identification of when—and which—brainstem nuclei become vulnerable based on their anatomical con-nectivity profiles 151,152 .

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9The present work should be considered alongside sev-eral methodological considerations. First, both struc-tural and functional imaging of the brainstem are vul-nerable to physiological noise arising from nearby pul-satile vasculature and cerebrospinal fluid filled spaces. Low signal-to-noise ratio increases uncertainty in fiber orientation estimation 153,154 that can potentially bias structural connectivity estimates. Furthermore, low signal-to-noise ratio can contaminate BOLD signals with non-neuronal fluctuations, complicating the interpreta-tion of brainstem functional connectivity 18 . We at-tempted to ameliorate this using extensive physiologi-cal noise correction. Second, fiber tracking models ap-plied to diffusion-weighted images may generate system-atic errors when reconstructing complex physical fiber configurations, including crossing, bending, and fan-ning fibers. Tractography methods preferentially recon-struct large fiber bundles with relatively straight and short trajectories, while under-representing more com-plex geometries 153–156 . This issue is particularly pre-dominant in the brainstem, where fiber bundles are densely packed. To address this limitation we incorpo-rated probabilistic tracking with anatomical constraints (ACT) and filtering (SIFT), which mitigates the large fiber bundle bias and increases the biological plausibil-ity of streamlines 157,158 . Both limitations illustrate that more research is necessary to optimize tractometry in the brainstem 47,89 . Last, brainstem nuclei with larger parcel volumes, or the nuclei that are physically close to one another, tend to have stronger structural connectiv-ity. An important question is whether this effect reflects genuine biological factors (larger neuronal populations giving rise to more axonal projections) or methodologi-cal factors (improved tractography performance in larger nuclei due to increased signal stability). We controlled for the effect of spatial proximity using null models that preserve edge length, and for the effect of size by statis-tically controlling for nucleus volume. In summary, there is growing effort in neuroscience to move beyond a corticocentric framework toward a more integrative view of brain and central nervous system or-ganization. The constellation of nuclei that constitute the brainstem are a focal point for numerous basal and cog-nitive functions, but they remain an underexplored do-main of the wider brain connectome. The present work presents an initial step towards understanding how the brainstem features in the broader question of structure-function relationships in the brain. 

> METHODS Diffusion data acquisition

7 Tesla diffusion MRI data were acquired using a Siemens Magnetom scanner from 20 healthy volunteers (mean age ± SE: 29 .5 ± 1.1 years; 10 males, 10 females). Acustom-built volume transmit coil combined with a 32 -channel receive coil was used to enhance sensitivity in deep brainstem nuclei relative to standard commercial coils 159 . To minimize head motion during scanning, participants were positioned supine with foam padding placed around the head and neck and were instructed to remain as still as possible throughout the acquisition. All participants provided written informed consent in ac-cordance with a protocol approved by the Institutional Review Board of Massachusetts General Hospital. For analysis, diffusion MRI data from 19 participants (mean age ± SE: 29 .0 ± 5 years; 10 males, 9 females) were in-cluded. One participant was excluded due to poor signal sensitivity in the midbrain and thalamus, signal dropout, increased field inhomogeneities and spatial distortions in the anterior pons, and reduced fiber orientation distribu-tion function (FOD) glyph amplitude compared with the remaining subjects. Full details of data acquisition and preprocessing are described in Garcia-Gomar et al. and Singh et al. 47,89 .High-resolution ( 1.7 mm isotropic) diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) data were acquired with a 2D single-shot spin-echo echo-planar imaging (EPI) approach, unipolar diffusion encoding with 82 contiguous slices to achieve full brain coverage, 66 .8 ms echo time, 7.4 s repetition time, anterior/posterior phase encoding direction, 1 475 

Hz/Px bandwidth, partial Fourier of 6/8, 60 diffusion di-rections, b value of 2 500 s/mm 2, and acquisition time 

8′53 ′′ . Additionally, for distortion correction we acquired 

7 interspersed “b 0” images (T 2-weighted, non-diffusion-weighted EPI, b value 0 s/mm 2) with opposite phase-encoding direction, and matched geometric distortion and spatial resolution to the DWIs. 

> fMRI data acquisition

Brainstem functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data was acquired, preprocessed, and previously presented by Cauzzo et al. 36 and Singh et al. 37 . The study protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Massachusetts General Hospital. All participants pro-vided written informed consent in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Twenty unrelated healthy par-ticipants (mean ± SE age: 29 .5 ± 1.1 years; 10 males, 

10 females) participated in an eyes-closed resting-state 7

Tesla session (Magnetom, Siemens Healthineers, Erlan-gen, Germany). Participants were compensated at a rate of 35 USD per hour. During the session, three 10 –minute runs were acquired. Importantly, brainstem-specific cus-tom protocols were developed for the 7 Tesla MRI acqui-sition and processing, which we describe below. Com-plete acquisition and processing details are provided in Cauzzo et al. 36 and Singh et al. 37 .Briefly, imaging was performed using a custom-built 

32 -channel receive coil and a volume transmit coil at 

7 Tesla. For each participant, three runs of functional gradient-echo echo-planar imaging (EPI) data were col-lected with an isotropic voxel size of 1.1 mm, matrix 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 size of 180 × 240 , GRAPPA factor of 3, 123 interleaved slices (sagittal slice orientation), 0.82 ms echo-spacing time, 32 ms echo time, 2.5 s repetition time, flip angle of 75 ◦, simultaneous-multi-slice factor of 3, 210 repeti-tions (volumes), anterior/posterior phase-encoding di-rections, 1 488 Hz/Px bandwidth, and acquisition time 

10 ′07 ′′ . Participants’ alertness was verbally confirmed be-tween runs. Foam pads were used to minimize head motion and earplugs were provided. To account for physiology–related signal fluctuations, timing of cardiac and respiratory cycles was recorded using a piezoelectric finger pulse sensor (ADInstruments, Colorado Springs, CO, USA) and a piezoelectric respiratory bellow (UFI, Morro Bay, CA, USA). To correct for geometric distor-tion, a field map with 2.0 mm isotropic resolution was acquired. In addition, a T 1-weighted multi-echo MEM-PRAGE anatomical image was acquired for each par-ticipant using a 3 Tesla Siemens Connectom MRI scan-ner equipped with a custom-built volume transmit coil and a 64 -channel receive coil. Images were obtained with an isotropic voxel size of 1 mm, field of view of 

256 × 256 × 176 mm 3, GRAPPA factor of 3, sagittal slice orientation, flip angle of 7◦, echo time of 1.69 , 3.5, 5.3,and 7.2 ms, 2.53 s repetition time, 1.5 s inversion-time, 

650 Hz/Px bandwidth, anterior/posterior phase encod-ing direction, and acquisition time 4′28 ′′ 36 .

> Diffusion data preprocessing

DWIs were denoised using local principal component analysis filter 160 , motion and distortion corrected (FSL, topup/eddy). Diffusion tensor (FSL, dtifit) invari-ants, such as fractional anisotropy (FA) map and non-diffusion-weighted S 0 image (T 2-weighted), were then computed. To run the tractography, we mapped 58 brain-stem and 8 diencephalic nuclei from the Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT) MNI (IIT-MNI) space to native FA/S 0

image space. To accomplish this, we first constructed an optimal group template from all subjects’ FA/S 0 images in native S0 space using the Advanced Normalization Tool (ANTs) 161 ; subsequently we coregistered the opti-mal FA/S0 group template to the FA/S 0 template in IIT-MNI space using affine transformation followed by non-linear warp. Finally, the transformation matrices from those two steps (from single subject’s FA/S 0 to optimal group template and from optimal group template to the FA/S 0 template in IIT-MNI space) were concatenated and inverted to compute the full coregistration transforma-tion, which were applied to brainstem nuclei labels to bring them from IIT-MNI space to single subject native space 36,37 . The 400 cortical labels of Schaefer parcel-lation in MNI space were transformed to single-subject native space using the concatenated inverse transforma-tion of the following steps aligning native space images to MNI space: native FA/S 0 images to optimal FA/S 0

group template to IIT-MNI to MNI. Subcortical regions of interest (i.e. bilateral thalamus proper, caudate, puta-men, pallidum, amygdala, hippocampus, accumbens) were parcellated from the preprocessed MEMPRAGE im-ages using Freesurfer 162 . We employed FSL-based reg-istration (FLIRT boundary-based affine registration) to bring these subcortical parcellations to native S 0 space. Finally, the hypothalamic atlas label from Pauli et al. 163 

was registered from MNI space to native S 0 space by con-catenating the transformation from MNI space to IIT-MNI space to the inverse registration described above map-ping images from IIT-MNI space to native space. 

> fMRI data preprocessing

Physiological noise correction was applied separately to each resting-state fMRI run using a custom-built Matlab implementation of RETROICOR 35 adapted to the slice acquisition sequence. Functional images were subse-quently slice-time corrected, reoriented to a standard ori-entation, and coregistered to the MEMPRAGE anatomi-cal image. Coregistration was implemented in AFNI us-ing a two-step approach consisting of an affine align-ment and a boundary-based, edge–enhancing nonlinear registration 164 . The accuracy of fMRI alignment to MNI template space was visually inspected for each partici-pant to ensure that template-defined brainstem nuclei were well aligned with individual anatomy. Next, mul-tiple nuisance regressors were regressed out from the fMRI time series, including six regressors describing the rigid-body motion, a regressor describing respiratory vol-ume per unit time convolved with a respiration response function 165 , a regressor describing heart rate convolved with a cardiac response function 166 , and five regressors capturing cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) signal. CSF regres-sors were derived using principal component analysis applied to a mask of the brainstem-surrounding ventri-cles, specifically, the lower part of the third ventricle, the cerebral aqueduct, and the fourth ventricle. There-fore, by design, the time-series of brainstem nuclei are not correlated with the signal from the surrounding ventricles 167,168 . The denoised data was then converted to percent signal change by dividing by the temporal sig-nal mean, multiplying by 100 , and bandpass filtering be-tween 0.01 –0.1 Hz. Finally, any residual temporal mean was removed, and the three runs were concatenated for subsequent functional network reconstruction. 

> Brainstem nuclei segmentation

Brainstem nuclei were defined according to the Brain-stem Navigator, a previously developed probabilistic at-las of in vivo brainstem ( n = 58 , 8 midline, 50 bilateral) and diencephalic ( n = 8 , 4 bilateral) nuclei 38 . The seg-mentation of the hypothalamus ( n = 1 midline region) was from 169 . All nuclei are defined in MNI 152 NLin 6Sym space at 1–mm 3 spatial resolution (matrix size: 182 ×

218 ×182 ). Here, we provide a brief overview of the atlas 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 reconstruction; full methodological details are available in previous publications 38,39,41–43,170 . Briefly, 12 healthy participants (mean ± SE age: 28 ± 1 years; 6 males, 6

females) underwent 7 Tesla MRI imaging, during which a T 2-weighted image and a diffusion-weighted image were acquired. Diffusion data was used to compute voxel-wise diffusion fractional anisotropy (FA). The T 2-weighted and FA images have high contrast for brainstem nuclei and were used to segment the nuclei. In Bian-ciardi et al. 38 , three raphe nuclei (median raphe, dorsal raphe, raphe magnus), the periaqueductal grey, the sub-stantia nigra, and the red nuclei were segmented. For each nucleus, the segmentation was done using a semi-automated approach by clustering either the FA or the T2-weighted image. Identified clusters corresponded to an individual nucleus or, in some cases, corresponded to multiple nuclei. In cases where the identified clus-ter included several nuclei, manual separation of nuclei was performed based on established anatomical brain-stem knowledge. This procedure resulted in a binary mask for each nucleus at the individual level. Subse-quently, labels were aligned to MNI 152 space, averaged across individuals, and converted to probabilistic maps, where a value of 100% indicated that a voxel was consis-tently identified as belonging to a given nucleus across all 

12 individuals. For all nuclei in the Brainstem Navigator atlas, the semi-automatic and manual segmentations en-sured that no nuclei overlapped; however, slight overlaps may occur in the group-averaged probabilistic templates, depending on the probability threshold applied. Later in Bianciardi et al. 39 , the mesopontine tegmen-tal nuclei, including cuneiform, pedunculotegmental nu-clei, oral pontine reticular nuclei, paramedian raphe, and caudal-linear raphe were segmented. They used the same semi-automated approach, with two additional val-idation steps: ( 1) nuclei were also manually segmented by a neurosurgeon using the T 2-weighted and FA images, and the mesopontine tegmental anatomical landmarks; and ( 2) segmented nuclei were compared with a post-mortem histologically-defined atlas 171 . All subsequent nuclei segmented in later publications were delineated manually by multiple experts. Final individual-level la-bels were defined as the intersection of independent seg-mentations provided by the experts. The probabilistic templates were generated by averaging the segmenta-tions across participants. Segmentations were validated against the Paxinos histological atlas 171 . Specifically, in Garcia-Gomar et al. 170 , the inferior and superior colli-culi and superior olivary complex, as well as the medial geniculate nucleus (MGN) and lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) which are part of the thalamus, were segmented. In Singh et al. 42 , the lateral and medial parabrachial nu-clei, the vestibular nuclei complex, and the medullary viscero-sensory-motor nuclei were segmented. The lat-eral and medial parabrachial nuclei were further vali-dated using histological evaluation from a post-mortem brainstem specimen. In Singh et al. 43 , the mesen-cephalic reticular formation, isthmic reticular forma-tion, microcellular tegmental nucleus, ventral tegmental area, and the caudal-rostral linear raphe nucleus com-plex were segmented. Last, in Garcia-Gomar et al. 41 ,the raphe obscurus, raphe pallidus, locus coeruleus, sub-coeruleus, laterodorsal tegmental nucleus-central grey of the rhombencephalon, inferior and superior medullary reticular formation, and the pontine reticular nucleus (oral/caudal part) were segmented. 

> Structural network reconstruction

To construct a structural connectome for each partici-pant, we computed global tractography using refined tis-sue segmentation to precisely account for brainstem gray and white matter boundaries. 

> Tissue segmentations and GM-WM boundary mask

Tissue segmentations of cortical/subcortical gray mat-ter (CGM/SGM), white matter (WM) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) were used as input for global tractography. To compute them, first we coregistered the preprocessed MEMPRAGE to native DWI S 0 space using “mrtrans-form” of MRtrix 3 software package (http://www.mrtrix. org) 172 . Then, we performed tissue segmentation into five different tissue types ( 5TT, i.e. CGM, SGM, WM, CSF and a pathological tissue compartment -empty in controls) of the MEMPRAGE image in native space us-ing “ 5ttgen” algorithm in MRtrix 3 with the FSL backend. We used non-skull-stripped and uncropped MEMPRAGE images to ensure accurate segmentation and preserve alignment with diffusion space. The 5ttgen algorithm treats brainstem and diencephalic nuclei mostly as white matter (because in T 1-weighted MRI they are not clearly visible), thus the five tissue segmentations were refined to precisely account for brainstem and diencephalic gray matter as follows. In IIT space, we first defined a brain-stem GM mask including all the Brainstem Navigator nu-clei, and a brainstem WM mask by subtracting the lat-ter from a whole brainstem mask. We then coregistered both the brainstem GM and WM masks from IIT to S 0

native space. Voxels overlapping with the CSF compart-ment were removed from the brainstem GM mask in na-tive space to avoid misclassification. The CGM segmen-tation was then refined by removing voxels belonging to the brainstem GM mask. Rather, this mask was incorpo-rated into the SGM segmentation, after enforcing mutual exclusivity with the existing SGM mask to prevent over-lapping assignments. Further, the brainstem GM mask was removed from the WM segmentation, and the brain-stem WM mask was added to the WM segmentation. The CSF and pathological tissue compartments were left un-changed. Finally, the refined CGM, SGM, WM segmen-tations and CSF and pathological tissue segmentations were merged to generate a refined 5TT image in S 0 na-tive diffusion space, input for anatomically constrained 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 tractography. The gray-white matter interface mask was generated from the refined 5TT image in diffusion space using the 

5tt 2gmwmi command in MRtrix 3. This step incorporated both CGM and SGM compartments defined in the refined 

5TT image to accurately delineate the gray-white matter interface, which was subsequently used for streamline seeding in anatomically constrained tractography. 

> Global tractography

Global tractography was performed using MRtrix3 (http: //www.mrtrix.org) 172 . Voxel-wise white matter fiber ori-entation distributions (FODs) were estimated in diffu-sion native space via constrained spherical deconvolu-tion (dwi 2fod) after computing the response function from preprocessed DWIs (dwi 2response) 173,174 . FODs, together with the refined 5TT segmentation and gray-white matter interface (see above), served as input for anatomically constrained tractography (ACT) using the iFOD 2 algorithm (“tckgen”) 175 . Streamlines were seeded at the gray-white matter interface to ensure biologi-cally plausible fiber initiation, and backtracking was en-abled to enforce anatomically valid termination at tissue boundaries. We generated 100 million total streamlines with minimum streamline length of 1 mm, maximum an-gle between successive steps of 45 °, and an FOD ampli-tude cut-off of 0.07 . Subsequently, we applied “tcksift” in MRtrix 3 to perform spherical deconvolution-informed filtering of tractograms (SIFT) 158 . This combined frame-work is hereafter referred to as ACT-SIFT-based trac-tography. The refined 5TT image was provided as the anatomical constraint, and SIFT was performed with ref-erence to the FOD image. Streamlines were iteratively removed to optimize correspondence between stream-line density and fiber density estimates until a final trac-togram comprising 10 million streamlines was obtained for downstream analyses. Following ACT-SIFT-based tractography, region-wise structural connectivity was quantified using an endpoint-constrained, seed-target approach. For each subject, streamline subsets were extracted from the ACT-SIFT tractograms ( 10 million streamlines) using “tckedit” with the -include and -ends_only options. This procedure was performed for each of the 483 predefined regions registered to diffusion native space. Only streamlines with endpoints terminating within a given region were retained, while streamlines merely passing through the region were excluded. For each seed region, stream-lines terminating in every other target region were sub-sequently isolated using the same endpoint-restricted criteria. The number of streamlines connecting each seed-target region pair was quantified using “tckinfo” and later normalized by 10 million as the total number of streamlines in SIFT, and streamline length statistics (mean, standard deviation, median, maximum, and min-imum) were computed using “tckstats”. This procedure was repeated for all seed-target combinations, resulting in a subject-specific 483 × 483 structural connectivity ma-trix derived from the ACT-SIFT tractograms. 

> Functional network reconstruction

To construct a functional connectome for each partic-ipant, we parcellated the cortex using the 400 -region Schaefer atlas 52 and parcellated the brainstem using the 58 -nucleus Brainstem Navigator atlas (https://www. nitrc.org/projects/brainstemnavig 38,39,41–43,170 ). In all analyses, we used the probabilistic brainstem labels that were thresholded at 35 %. This thresholding resulted in some overlapping voxels for bordering nuclei. Specifi-cally, in the 8334 voxels labeled as part of a brainstem nu-cleus, 7922 (95 %) were labeled only once, whereas 405 

(4.8%) were labeled twice and 7 (0.08 %) labeled three times. No voxel was assigned to more than three nuclei. Functional connectivity was quantified as the Pearson correlation between time-series for every pair of brain regions ( 458 regions in total). The group-averaged func-tional connectome was obtained by averaging individual connectomes across participants. 

> Group-consensus structural connectivity

The group-representative structural connectome (shown in Fig. 1a) was constructed using a distance-dependent consensus thresholding approach 58,176,177 . This approach identified consistent structural connections across sub-jects and mitigated inconsistencies in individual sub-ject tractography reconstructions 178,179 . To construct the group-consensus connectome (as shown in Fig. 1a), we first derived a binary group-consensus structural con-nectivity matrix while preserving the connectomes’ ( 1)density and ( 2) distribution of edge lengths across indi-vidual subjects 58,101,180 . We collated all edges from in-dividual subject connectomes and binned the edges by their length. The number of bins was determined heuris-tically, as the square root of the mean binary density across subjects. Within each bin, edges were ranked by their frequency of occurrence across subjects, and the most consistently expressed connections were retained. Specifically, if the mean number of edges across subjects within a given bin was equal to k, the k edges with the highest cross-subject consistency of that length were se-lected. The resulting binary consensus matrix was then applied as a mask to the element-wise average of indi-vidual subjects’ weighted structural connectivity matri-ces, yielding the final weighted group-consensus connec-tome. This distance-dependent thresholding procedure yielded a network that preserved the empirical edge-length distribution while preferentially preserving con-nections that were consistently expressed across subjects. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

> Structural communicability

Communicability (Cij ) between two nodes i and j

(i̸ = j) quantified the extent to which they were con-nected through all possible weighted walks in a network, while accounting for both connection strength and path length 59,60 . Communicability incorporated contributions from walks of all lengths, assigning greater importance to shorter walks. For a weighted structural connectivity matrix A, communicability was defined using the matrix exponential of the degree-normalized adjacency matrix, 

Cij =

h

exp 



D−1/2AD −1/2i 

> ij

where D was the diagonal degree matrix with entries 

Dii = P 

> k

Aik . In this formulation, each walk con-tributed the product of the edge weights along the walk, while normalization by node degree controlled for the in-fluence of highly connected nodes and ensures that com-municability reflected relative, rather than absolute, con-nectivity strength. Structural communicability was com-puted using the communicability_wei function from the 

netneurotools package 181 .

> Neurosynth meta-analytic term maps

Probabilistic measures of the association between voxels and cognitive processes were obtained from Neurosynth 53 , a meta-analytic tool that synthesizes re-sults from more than 14 000 published neuroimaging studies by searching for high-frequency keywords that are published alongside their associated voxel coordi-nates (https://github.com/neurosynth/neurosynth, us-ing the volumetric association test maps 54 ). This mea-sure of association was the probability that a given cog-nitive process was reported in the study if there was activation observed at a given voxel. Although 1 334 

terms were reported in the Neurosynth engine, we fo-cused our analysis primarily on cognitive function and, therefore, limited the terms of interest to cognitive and behavioral terms. To avoid selection bias, the terms were selected from the Cognitive Atlas, a public ontology of cognitive science 71 , which included a comprehensive list of neurocognitive terms. We ended up incorporating 

123 terms, ranging from umbrella terms (“attention” and “emotion”) to specific cognitive processes (“visual atten-tion” and “episodic memory”), behaviors (”eating” and “sleep”) and emotional states (“fear” and “anxiety”). The coordinates reported by Neurosynth were parcellated ac-cording to the Schaefer-400 atlas 52 . The full list of Neu-rosynth functional/cognitive included terms was listed in Table. S2. 

> Spin tests

To assess the effect of spatial autocorrelation on spatial associations between two cortical brain maps (Fig. 1e, 2), we used the so-called spatial autocorrelation preserving permutation tests, commonly referred to as “spin tests” 182 . Briefly, brain phenotypes were projected to spherical projection of the fsaverage surface. This in-volved selecting the coordinates of the vertex closest to the center of mass for each parcel. These parcel coordi-nates were then randomly rotated, and original parcels were reassigned to the value of the closest rotated parcel (N repetitions). For parcels where the medial wall was the closest, we assigned the value of the next closest par-cel instead. Following these steps, we obtained a series of randomized brain maps that had the same values and spatial autocorrelation as the original map, while the re-lationship between values and their spatial location had been permuted. These maps were then used to gener-ate null distributions of desired statistics. Throughout the manuscript, whenever the spatial correspondence be-tween two brain maps was tested for, “spin test” was carried out for maps parcellated with the Schaefer-400 

cortical atlas 52 . Notably, this parcellation was chosen be-cause it divided the cortex into relatively homogeneous parcel sizes, and its number of parcels was comparable to the estimated number of distinct human neocortical areas 183,184 .

> Network randomization

Structural networks were randomized using a procedure that preserves the density, edge length, and degree dis-tribution of the empirical network 55,182 . Edges were binned according to Euclidean distance ( 10 bins). Within each bin, pairs of edges were selected at random and swapped, for a total number of swaps equal to the num-ber of regions in the network multiplied by 20 . This pro-cedure was repeated N times to generate N null struc-tural networks, which were then used to generate null distributions of network-related measure of interest. When generating the null networks, we used Eu-clidean distance between brain regions as a proxy for streamline length. These measures are highly correlated (see Fig. S7). This choice was motivated by the sparsity of the empirical structural connectome, which results in a sparse length matrix that cannot be directly used in the rewiring algorithm introduced by Betzel et al. 55 .

> Data and code availability

All code used to perform the analyses is publicly available at https://github.com/netneurolab/Farahani_ brainstemsc. The analyses rely on open-source Python packages, including NumPy (version 1.21 .6)185,186 , SciPy (version 1.7.3)187 , pandas (version 1.3.5)188 , seaborn 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 (version 0.12 .2)189 , Matplotlib (version 3.5.3)190 ,statsmodels (version 0.13 .5)191 , Nilearn (version 

0.10 .1)192 , NiBabel (version 4.0.2)193 and netneurotools (version 0.2.3)181 .Cortical regions are defined using the Schaefer-400 

parcellation 52 . Brainstem nuclei are defined using the Brainstem Navigator atlas, which is publicly available at https://www.nitrc.org/projects/brainstemnavig 38–43 .All preprocessed data, including the brainstem-augmented functional and structural connectomes are publicly available at https://osf.io/tqs64. 

Acknowledgments 

BM acknowledges support from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (RGPIN-2017-04265), Canadian Institutes of Health Research (PJT-180439), and Canada Research Chairs Program (CRC-2022-00169). JYH acknowledges support from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada. MB acknowledges support from the National Institute of Aging, NIH: R01-AG063982 and the Michael J. Fox Foundation: MJFF-022672 Award. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript. 

Competing interests 

SK has been a co-founder and non-executive director of Magnoport Solutions Private Limited (now xImaging Technologies Private Limited) since February 2025 . SK received no financial compensation from the company for this work or for the preparation of this manuscript. The other authors declare no competing interests. 

Disclaimer 

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not reflect the official policy or position of the Henry M. Jackson Foundation for the Advancement of Military Medicine Inc. The opinions and assertions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not reflect the official policy or po-sition of the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences or the Department of War. 

[1] Jessica S Damoiseaux and Michael D Greicius. Greater than the sum of its parts: a review of studies combining structural connectivity and resting-state functional con-nectivity. Brain Structure and Function , 213(6):525–533, 2009. [2] Patric Hagmann, Leila Cammoun, Xavier Gigandet, Reto Meuli, Christopher J Honey, Van J Wedeen, and Olaf Sporns. Mapping the structural core of human cerebral cortex. PLoS biology , 6(7):e159, 2008. [3] Christopher J Honey, Olaf Sporns, Leila Cammoun, Xavier Gigandet, Jean-Philippe Thiran, Reto Meuli, and Patric Hagmann. Predicting human resting-state func-tional connectivity from structural connectivity. Proceed-ings of the National Academy of Sciences , 106(6):2035– 2040, 2009. [4] Olaf Sporns. Structure and function of complex brain networks. Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience , 15(3):247– 262, 2013. [5] Hae-Jeong Park and Karl Friston. Structural and func-tional brain networks: from connections to cognition. 

Science , 342(6158):1238411, 2013. [6] Ann M Hermundstad, Danielle S Bassett, Kevin SBrown, Elissa M Aminoff, David Clewett, Scott Free-man, Amy Frithsen, Arianne Johnson, Christine M Tip-per, Michael B Miller, et al. Structural foundations of resting-state and task-based functional connectivity in the human brain. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 110(15):6169–6174, 2013. [7] Bratislav Miši´ c, Richard F Betzel, Marcel A De Reus, Mar-tijn P Van Den Heuvel, Marc G Berman, Anthony R McIn-tosh, and Olaf Sporns. Network-level structure-function relationships in human neocortex. Cerebral Cortex , 26 (7):3285–3296, 2016. [8] Pawel Skudlarski, Kanchana Jagannathan, Vince D Cal-houn, Michelle Hampson, Beata A Skudlarska, and God-frey Pearlson. Measuring brain connectivity: diffusion tensor imaging validates resting state temporal correla-tions. Neuroimage , 43(3):554–561, 2008. [9] Bertha Vázquez-Rodríguez, Laura E Suárez, Ross DMarkello, Golia Shafiei, Casey Paquola, Patric Hagmann, Martijn P Van Den Heuvel, Boris C Bernhardt, R Nathan Spreng, and Bratislav Misic. Gradients of structure– function tethering across neocortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 116(42):21219–21227, 2019. [10] Laura E Suárez, Ross D Markello, Richard F Betzel, and Bratislav Misic. Linking structure and function in macroscale brain networks. Trends in Cognitive Sciences ,24(4):302–315, 2020. [11] Zhen-Qi Liu, Golia Shafiei, Sylvain Baillet, and Bratislav Misic. Spatially heterogeneous structure-function cou-pling in haemodynamic and electromagnetic brain net-works. Neuroimage , 278:120276, 2023. [12] Panagiotis Fotiadis, Linden Parkes, Kathryn A Davis, Theodore D Satterthwaite, Russell T Shinohara, and Dani S Bassett. Structure–function coupling in macroscale human brain networks. Nature Reviews Neu-roscience , 25(10):688–704, 2024. [13] Mandeep S Dagli, John E Ingeholm, and James V Haxby. Localization of cardiac-induced signal change in fmri. 

Neuroimage , 9(4):407–415, 1999. [14] Dorit Merhof, Grzegorz Soza, Andreas Stadlbauer, Gün-ther Greiner, and Christopher Nimsky. Correction of sus-ceptibility artifacts in diffusion tensor data using non-linear registration. Medical Image Analysis , 11(6):588– 603, 2007. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

[15] Ann K Harvey, Kyle TS Pattinson, Jonathan CW Brooks, Stephen D Mayhew, Mark Jenkinson, and Richard G Wise. Brainstem functional magnetic resonance imag-ing: disentangling signal from physiological noise. Jour-nal of Magnetic Resonance Imaging: An Official Journal of the International Society for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine , 28(6):1337–1344, 2008. [16] J Alvarez-Linera. Magnetic resonance techniques for the brainstem. In Seminars in Ultrasound, CT and MRI , vol-ume 31, pages 230–245. Elsevier, 2010. [17] Anastasia A Ford, Luis Colon-Perez, William T Triplett, Joseph M Gullett, Thomas H Mareci, and David BFitzGerald. Imaging white matter in human brainstem. 

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 7:400, 2013. [18] Jonathan CW Brooks, Olivia K Faull, Kyle TS Pattinson, and Mark Jenkinson. Physiological noise in brainstem fmri. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 7:623, 2013. [19] F Beissner. Functional mri of the brainstem: common problems and their solutions. Clinical Neuroradiology ,25(Suppl 2):251–257, 2015. [20] Catie Chang, Erika P Raven, and Jeff H Duyn. Brain– heart interactions: challenges and opportunities with functional magnetic resonance imaging at ultra-high field. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences , 374 (2067):20150188, 2016. [21] Roberta Sclocco, Florian Beissner, Marta Bianciardi, Jonathan R Polimeni, and Vitaly Napadow. Challenges and opportunities for brainstem neuroimaging with ul-trahigh field mri. Neuroimage , 168:412–426, 2018. [22] Sina Straub, Benjamin R Knowles, Sebastian Flassbeck, Ruth Steiger, Mark E Ladd, and Elke R Gizewski. Map-ping the human brainstem: Brain nuclei and fiber tracts at 3 t and 7 t. NMR in Biomedicine , 32(9):e4118, 2019. [23] M-Marsel Mesulam. Large-scale neurocognitive net-works and distributed processing for attention, lan-guage, and memory. Annals of Neurology: Official Jour-nal of the American Neurological Association and the Child Neurology Society , 28(5):597–613, 1990. [24] Stephen L Foote and Jaime A Pineda. Extrathalamic modulation of cortical function. 1993. [25] Juan Mena-Segovia, Hana M Sims, Peter J Magill, and J Paul Bolam. Cholinergic brainstem neurons modulate cortical gamma activity during slow oscillations. The Journal of Physiology , 586(12):2947–2960, 2008. [26] Trevor W Robbins and AFT2863127 Arnsten. The neuropsychopharmacology of fronto-executive function: monoaminergic modulation. Annual Review of Neuro-science , 32(1):267–287, 2009. [27] Melissa R Warden, Aslihan Selimbeyoglu, Julie J Mirz-abekov, Maisie Lo, Kimberly R Thompson, Sung-Yon Kim, Avishek Adhikari, Kay M Tye, Loren M Frank, and Karl Deisseroth. A prefrontal cortex–brainstem neuronal projection that controls response to behavioural chal-lenge. Nature , 492(7429):428–432, 2012. [28] A Moses Lee, Jennifer L Hoy, Antonello Bonci, Linda Wilbrecht, Michael P Stryker, and Cristopher M Niell. Identification of a brainstem circuit regulating visual cortical state in parallel with locomotion. Neuron , 83 (2):455–466, 2014. [29] Ruud L van den Brink, Thomas Pfeffer, and Tobias H Donner. Brainstem modulation of large-scale intrinsic cortical activity correlations. Frontiers in Human Neuro-science , 13:340, 2019. [30] Peter Novak, Vera Novak, Allahyar Kangarlu, Amir M Abduljalil, Donald W Chakeres, and Pierre-Marie Ro-bitaille. High resolution mri of the brainstem at 8 t. 

Journal of Computer Assisted Tomography , 25(2):242– 246, 2001. [31] Andreas Deistung, Andreas Schäfer, Ferdinand Schweser, Uta Biedermann, Daniel Güllmar, Robert Trampel, Robert Turner, and Jürgen R Reichenbach. High-resolution mr imaging of the human brainstem in vivo at 7 tesla. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 7:710, 2013. [32] Birgit R Plantinga, Yasin Temel, Alard Roebroeck, Kâmil Uluda˘ g, Dimo Ivanov, Mark L Kuijf, and Bart M ter Haar Romenij. Ultra-high field magnetic resonance imaging of the basal ganglia and related structures. 

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 8:876, 2014. [33] Antonio Meola, Fang-Cheng Yeh, Wendy Fellows-Mayle, Jared Weed, and Juan C Fernandez-Miranda. Human connectome-based tractographic atlas of the brainstem connections and surgical approaches. Neurosurgery , 79 (3):437–455, 2016. [34] Yuchun Tang, Wei Sun, Arthur W Toga, John M Ring-man, and Yonggang Shi. A probabilistic atlas of human brainstem pathways based on connectome imaging data. 

Neuroimage , 169:227–239, 2018. [35] Gary H Glover, Tie-Qiang Li, and David Ress. Image-based method for retrospective correction of physiologi-cal motion effects in fmri: Retroicor. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine: An Official Journal of the International Soci-ety for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine , 44(1):162–167, 2000. [36] Simone Cauzzo, Kavita Singh, Matthew Stauder, María Guadalupe García-Gomar, Nicola Vanello, Claudio Passino, Jeffrey Staab, Iole Indovina, and Marta Biancia-rdi. Functional connectome of brainstem nuclei involved in autonomic, limbic, pain and sensory processing in liv-ing humans from 7 tesla resting state fmri. Neuroimage ,250:118925, 2022. [37] Kavita Singh, Simone Cauzzo, María Guadalupe García-Gomar, Matthew Stauder, Nicola Vanello, Claudio Passino, and Marta Bianciardi. Functional connectome of arousal and motor brainstem nuclei in living humans by 7 tesla resting-state fmri. Neuroimage , 249:118865, 2022. [38] Marta Bianciardi, Nicola Toschi, Brian L Edlow, Cor-nelius Eichner, Kawin Setsompop, Jonathan R Polimeni, Emery N Brown, Hannah C Kinney, Bruce R Rosen, and Lawrence L Wald. Toward an in vivo neuroimaging template of human brainstem nuclei of the ascending arousal, autonomic, and motor systems. Brain Connec-tivity , 5(10):597–607, 2015. [39] Marta Bianciardi, Christian Strong, Nicola Toschi, Brian L Edlow, Bruce Fischl, Emery N Brown, Bruce R Rosen, and Lawrence L Wald. A probabilistic template of human mesopontine tegmental nuclei from in vivo 7 t mri. Neuroimage , 170:222–230, 2018. [40] María G García-Gomar, Christian Strong, Nicola Toschi, Kavita Singh, Bruce R Rosen, Lawrence L Wald, and Marta Bianciardi. In vivo probabilistic structural atlas of the inferior and superior colliculi, medial and lateral geniculate nuclei and superior olivary complex in hu-mans based on 7 tesla mri. Frontiers in Neuroscience , 13: 764, 2019. [41] María G García-Gomar, Aleksandar Videnovic, Kavita 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

Singh, Matthew Stauder, Laura D Lewis, Lawrence L Wald, Bruce R Rosen, and Marta Bianciardi. Disruption of brainstem structural connectivity in rem sleep behav-ior disorder using 7 tesla magnetic resonance imaging. 

Movement Disorders , 37(4):847–853, 2022. [42] Kavita Singh, Iole Indovina, Jean C Augustinack, Kim-berly Nestor, María G García-Gomar, Jeffrey P Staab, and Marta Bianciardi. Probabilistic template of the lateral parabrachial nucleus, medial parabrachial nu-cleus, vestibular nuclei complex, and medullary viscero-sensory-motor nuclei complex in living humans from 7 tesla mri. Frontiers in Neuroscience , 13:1425, 2020. [43] Kavita Singh, María Guadalupe García-Gomar, and Marta Bianciardi. Probabilistic atlas of the mesen-cephalic reticular formation, isthmic reticular formation, microcellular tegmental nucleus, ventral tegmental area nucleus complex, and caudal–rostral linear raphe nu-cleus complex in living humans from 7 tesla magnetic resonance imaging. Brain Connectivity , 11(8):613–623, 2021. [44] Bram Stieltjes, Walter E Kaufmann, Peter CM Van Zijl, Kim Fredericksen, Godfrey D Pearlson, Meiyappan So-laiyappan, and Susumu Mori. Diffusion tensor imaging and axonal tracking in the human brainstem. Neuroim-age , 14(3):723–735, 2001. [45] Simon Levinson, Michelle Miller, Ahmed Iftekhar, Mon-ica Justo, Daniel Arriola, Wenxin Wei, Saman Hazany, Josue M Avecillas-Chasin, Taylor P Kuhn, Andreas Horn, et al. A structural connectivity atlas of limbic brainstem nuclei. Frontiers in Neuroimaging , 1:1009399, 2023. [46] Yu Zhang, Andrei A Vakhtin, Jennifer S Jennings, Payam Massaband, Max Wintermark, Patricia L Craig, J Wesson Ashford, J David Clark, and Ansgar J Furst. Diffusion tensor tractography of brainstem fibers and its applica-tion in pain. PloS one , 15(2):e0213952, 2020. [47] Kavita Singh, María Guadalupe García-Gomar, Simone Cauzzo, Jeffrey P Staab, Iole Indovina, and Marta Bian-ciardi. Structural connectivity of autonomic, pain, lim-bic, and sensory brainstem nuclei in living humans based on 7 tesla and 3 tesla mri. Human Brain Mapping , 43 (10):3086–3112, 2022. [48] Justine Y Hansen, Simone Cauzzo, Kavita Singh, María Guadalupe García-Gomar, James M Shine, Marta Bianciardi, and Bratislav Misic. Integrating brainstem and cortical functional architectures. Nature Neuro-science , 27(12):2500–2511, 2024. [49] Constantin Economo et al. Die cytoarchitektonik der hirnrinde des erwachsenen menschen. Arch NeurPsyche ,1925. [50] Constantin Freiherr von Economo, Georg N Koskinas, and Lazaros C Triarhou. Atlas of cytoarchitectonics of the adult human cerebral cortex , volume 10. Karger Basel, 2008. [51] Lianne H Scholtens, Marcel A de Reus, Siemon Cde Lange, Ruben Schmidt, and Martijn P van den Heuvel. An mri von economo–koskinas atlas. Neuroim-age , 170:249–256, 2018. [52] Alexander Schaefer, Ru Kong, Evan M Gordon, Timo-thy O Laumann, Xi-Nian Zuo, Avram J Holmes, Simon B Eickhoff, and BT Thomas Yeo. Local-global parcella-tion of the human cerebral cortex from intrinsic func-tional connectivity mri. Cerebral Cortex , 28(9):3095– 3114, 2018. [53] Tal Yarkoni, Russell A Poldrack, Thomas E Nichols, David C Van Essen, and Tor D Wager. Large-scale au-tomated synthesis of human functional neuroimaging data. Nature Methods , 8(8):665–670, 2011. [54] Simon B Eickhoff, Danilo Bzdok, Angela R Laird, Florian Kurth, and Peter T Fox. Activation likelihood estimation meta-analysis revisited. Neuroimage , 59(3):2349–2361, 2012. [55] Richard F Betzel and Danielle S Bassett. Specificity and robustness of long-distance connections in weighted, interareal connectomes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 115(21):E4880–E4889, 2018. [56] Christopher J Honey, Jean-Philippe Thivierge, and Olaf Sporns. Can structure predict function in the human brain? Neuroimage , 52(3):766–776, 2010. [57] Razia Azen and David V Budescu. The dominance anal-ysis approach for comparing predictors in multiple re-gression. Psychological Methods , 8(2):129, 2003. [58] Richard F Betzel, Alessandra Griffa, Patric Hagmann, and Bratislav Miši´ c. Distance-dependent consensus thresholds for generating group-representative struc-tural brain networks. Network Neuroscience , 3(2):475– 496, 2019. [59] Ernesto Estrada and Naomichi Hatano. Communicabil-ity in complex networks. Physical Review E—Statistical, Nonlinear, and Soft Matter Physics , 77(3):036111, 2008. [60] Jonathan J Crofts and Desmond J Higham. A weighted communicability measure applied to complex brain net-works. Journal of the Royal Society Interface , 6(33):411– 414, 2009. [61] Caio Seguin, Olaf Sporns, Andrew Zalesky, Fernando Calamante, et al. Network communication models nar-row the gap between the modular organization of struc-tural and functional brain networks. Neuroimage , 257: 119323, 2022. [62] Robert H Wurtz and Joanne E Albano. Visual-motor function of the primate superior colliculus. Annual Re-view of Neuroscience , 3(1):189–226, 1980. [63] James M Sprague and Thomas H Meikle Jr. The role of the superior colliculus in visually guided behavior. Ex-perimental Neurology , 11(1):115–146, 1965. [64] Christine E Collins, David C Lyon, and Jon H Kaas. Distribution across cortical areas of neurons projecting to the superior colliculus in new world monkeys. The Anatomical Record Part A: Discoveries in Molecular, Cel-lular, and Evolutionary Biology: An Official Publication of the American Association of Anatomists , 285(1):619–627, 2005. [65] Christina M Cerkevich, David C Lyon, Pooja Balaram, and Jon H Kaas. Distribution of cortical neurons pro-jecting to the superior colliculus in macaque monkeys. 

Eye and Brain , 6(sup1):121–137, 2014. [66] Jean-Pierre Hornung. The human raphe nuclei and the serotonergic system. Journal of Chemical Neuroanatomy ,26(4):331–343, 2003. [67] S Mark Williams and PS Goldman-Rakic. Widespread origin of the primate mesofrontal dopamine system. 

Cerebral Cortex , 8(4):321–345, 1998. [68] David B Carr and Susan R Sesack. Projections from the rat prefrontal cortex to the ventral tegmental area: tar-get specificity in the synaptic associations with mesoac-cumbens and mesocortical neurons. Journal of Neuro-science , 20(10):3864–3873, 2000. [69] Ethan S Bromberg-Martin, Masayuki Matsumoto, and Okihide Hikosaka. Dopamine in motivational control: 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

rewarding, aversive, and alerting. Neuron , 68(5):815– 834, 2010. [70] Marisela Morales and Elyssa B Margolis. Ventral tegmen-tal area: cellular heterogeneity, connectivity and be-haviour. Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 18(2):73–85, 2017. [71] Russell A Poldrack, Aniket Kittur, Donald Kalar, Eric Miller, Christian Seppa, Yolanda Gil, D Stott Parker, Fred W Sabb, and Robert M Bilder. The cognitive at-las: toward a knowledge foundation for cognitive neu-roscience. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics , 5:17, 2011. [72] Qiang Gu. Neuromodulatory transmitter systems in the cortex and their role in cortical plasticity. Neuroscience ,111(4):815–835, 2002. [73] Lisa A Briand, Howard Gritton, William M Howe, Da-mon A Young, and Martin Sarter. Modulators in concert for cognition: modulator interactions in the prefrontal cortex. Progress in Neurobiology , 83(2):69–91, 2007. [74] David T George, Rezvan Ameli, and George F Koob. Periaqueductal gray sheds light on dark areas of psy-chopathology. Trends in Neurosciences , 42(5):349–360, 2019. [75] U˘ gur Türe, M Gazi Ya¸ sargil, Allan H Friedman, and Os-sama Al-Mefty. Fiber dissection technique: lateral aspect of the brain. Neurosurgery , 47(2):417–427, 2000. [76] Abhidha Shah, Sukhdeep Singh Jhawar, Maximilliano Nunez, Aimee Goel, and Atul Goel. Brainstem anatomy: A study on the basis of the pattern of fiber organization. 

World Neurosurgery , 134:e826–e846, 2020. [77] John D French, FK Von Amerongen, and HW Magoun. An activating system in brain stem of monkey. AMA Archives of Neurology & Psychiatry , 68(5):577–590, 1952. [78] K Hartmann von Monakow, K Akert, and H Künzle. Pro-jections of precentral and premotor cortex to the red nu-cleus and other midbrain areas in macaca fascicularis. 

Experimental Brain Research , 34(1):91–105, 1979. [79] Robert M Beckstead, Joel R Morse, and Ralph Norgren. The nucleus of the solitary tract in the monkey: projec-tions to the thalamus and brain stem nuclei. Journal of Comparative Neurology , 190(2):259–282, 1980. [80] Linda J Porrino and Patricia S Goldman-Rakic. Brain-stem innervation of prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortex in the rhesus monkey revealed by retrograde transport of hrp. Journal of Comparative Neurology , 205 (1):63–76, 1982. [81] Sten Grillner and Peter Wallen. Central pattern gen-erators for locomotion, with special reference to verte-brates. Annual Review of Neuroscience , 1985. [82] Christine A Livingston and Robert B Leonard. Locomo-tion evoked by stimulation of the brain stem in the at-lantic stingray, dasyatis sabina. Journal of Neuroscience ,10(1):194–204, 1990. [83] Schahram Akbarian, Otto-Joachim Grüsser, and Wolf-gang O Guldin. Corticofugal connections between the cerebral cortex and brainstem vestibular nuclei in the macaque monkey. Journal of Comparative Neurology ,339(3):421–437, 1994. [84] AD Craig. Distribution of brainstem projections from spinal lamina i neurons in the cat and the monkey. Jour-nal of Comparative Neurology , 361(2):225–248, 1995. [85] Patrick J Whelan. Control of locomotion in the decer-ebrate cat. Progress in Neurobiology , 49(5):481–515, 1996. [86] Patricia Del Cerro, Ángel Rodríguez-De-Lope, and Jorge E Collazos-Castro. The cortical motor system in the domestic pig: origin and termination of the corti-cospinal tract and cortico-brainstem projections. Fron-tiers in Neuroanatomy , 15:748050, 2021. [87] Seung Wook Oh, Julie A Harris, Lydia Ng, Brent Winslow, Nicholas Cain, Stefan Mihalas, Quanxin Wang, Chris Lau, Leonard Kuan, Alex M Henry, et al. Amesoscale connectome of the mouse brain. Nature , 508 (7495):207–214, 2014. [88] B De Coene, JV Hajnal, JM Pennock, and GM Bydder. Mri of the brain stem using fluid attenuated inversion recivery pulse sequences. Neuroradiology , 35(5):327– 331, 1993. [89] María Guadalupe García-Gomar, Kavita Singh, Simone Cauzzo, and Marta Bianciardi. In vivo structural connec-tome of arousal and motor brainstem nuclei by 7 tesla and 3 tesla mri. Human Brain Mapping , 43(14):4397– 4421, 2022. [90] HGJM Kuypers. A new look at the organization of the motor system. Progress in Brain Research , 57:381–403, 1982. [91] Akinsegun Akintunde and Donald F Buxton. Origins and collateralization of corticospinal, corticopontine, corti-corubral and corticostriatal tracts: a multiple retrograde fluorescent tracing study. Brain Research , 586(2):208– 218, 1992. [92] D Purves and GJ Augustine. The primary motor cor-tex: upper motor neurons that initiate complex volun-tary movements in: D, p., g, ja, fitzpatrick d, et al. Neu-roscience. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland. , 2001. [93] RJ Nudo and RB Masterton. Descending pathways to the spinal cord: a comparative study of 22 mammals. 

Journal of Comparative Neurology , 277(1):53–79, 1988. [94] Sten Grillner. The motor infrastructure: from ion chan-nels to neuronal networks. Nature Reviews Neuroscience ,4(7):573–586, 2003. [95] Quentin Welniarz, Isabelle Dusart, and Emmanuel Roze. The corticospinal tract: Evolution, development, and human disorders. Developmental Neurobiology , 77(7): 810–829, 2017. [96] Robert D Oades and Glenda M Halliday. Ventral tegmen-tal (a10) system: neurobiology. 1. anatomy and connec-tivity. Brain Research Reviews , 12(2):117–165, 1987. [97] Jonas A Hosp, Volker Arnd Coenen, Michel Rijntjes, Karl Egger, Horst Urbach, Cornelius Weiller, and Marco Reis-ert. Ventral tegmental area connections to motor and sensory cortical fields in humans. Brain Structure and Function , 224(8):2839–2855, 2019. [98] Muhammad Zubair, Sjoerd R Murris, Kaoru Isa, Hiro-taka Onoe, Yoshinori Koshimizu, Kenta Kobayashi, Wim Vanduffel, and Tadashi Isa. Divergent whole brain pro-jections from the ventral midbrain in macaques. Cerebral Cortex , 31(6):2913–2931, 2021. [99] TM Lock, JS Baizer, and DB Bender. Distribution of cor-ticotectal cells in macaque. Experimental Brain Research ,151(4):455–470, 2003. [100] Richard J Krauzlis, Lee P Lovejoy, and Alexandre Zénon. Superior colliculus and visual spatial attention. Annual Review of Neuroscience , 36(1):165–182, 2013. [101] Bratislav Miši´ c, Richard F Betzel, Azadeh Nematzadeh, Joaquin Goni, Alessandra Griffa, Patric Hagmann, Alessandro Flammini, Yong-Yeol Ahn, and Olaf Sporns. Cooperative and competitive spreading dynamics on the 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 

human connectome. Neuron , 86(6):1518–1529, 2015. [102] Bharat B Biswal and Lucina Q Uddin. The history and future of resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging. Nature , 641(8065):1121–1131, 2025. [103] Maria Giulia Preti and Dimitri Van De Ville. Decoupling of brain function from structure reveals regional behav-ioral specialization in humans. Nature Communications ,10(1):4747, 2019. [104] Graham L Baum, Zaixu Cui, David R Roalf, Rastko Ciric, Richard F Betzel, Bart Larsen, Matthew Cieslak, Philip A Cook, Cedric H Xia, Tyler M Moore, et al. Development of structure–function coupling in human brain networks during youth. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 117(1):771–778, 2020. [105] Vincent Bazinet, Reinder Vos de Wael, Patric Hagmann, Boris C Bernhardt, and Bratislav Misic. Multiscale com-munication in cortico-cortical networks. Neuroimage ,243:118546, 2021. [106] Zijin Gu, Keith Wakefield Jamison, Mert Rory Sabuncu, and Amy Kuceyeski. Heritability and interindividual variability of regional structure-function coupling. Na-ture Communications , 12(1):4894, 2021. [107] Zhen-Qi Liu, Bertha Vazquez-Rodriguez, R Nathan Spreng, Boris C Bernhardt, Richard F Betzel, and Bratislav Misic. Time-resolved structure-function cou-pling in brain networks. Communications Biology , 5(1): 532, 2022. [108] Farnaz Zamani Esfahlani, Joshua Faskowitz, Jonah Slack, Bratislav Miši´ c, and Richard F Betzel. Local structure-function relationships in human brain net-works across the lifespan. Nature Communications , 13 (1):2053, 2022. [109] Justine Y Hansen, Golia Shafiei, Katharina Voigt, Emma X Liang, Sylvia ML Cox, Marco Leyton, Sharna D Jamadar, and Bratislav Misic. Integrating multimodal and multiscale connectivity blueprints of the human cerebral cortex in health and disease. Plos biology , 21 (9):e3002314, 2023. [110] Zhen-Qi Liu, Andrea I Luppi, Justine Y Hansen, Ye Ella Tian, Andrew Zalesky, BT Thomas Yeo, Ben D Fulcher, and Bratislav Misic. Benchmarking methods for map-ping functional connectivity in the brain. Nature Meth-ods , pages 1–10, 2025. [111] Mark C Nelson, Wen Da Lu, Ilana R Leppert, Heather A Hansen, Christopher D Rowley, Bratislav Misic, and Christine L Tardif. The role of white matter myelin in structural-functional network coupling. bioRxiv , pages 2025–07, 2025. [112] Gustavo Deco, Adrián Ponce-Alvarez, Dante Mantini, Gian Luca Romani, Patric Hagmann, and Maurizio Cor-betta. Resting-state functional connectivity emerges from structurally and dynamically shaped slow linear fluctuations. Journal of Neuroscience , 33(27):11239– 11252, 2013. [113] Gustavo Deco, Josephine Cruzat, Joana Cabral, Gitte M Knudsen, Robin L Carhart-Harris, Peter C Whybrow, Nikos K Logothetis, and Morten L Kringelbach. Whole-brain multimodal neuroimaging model using serotonin receptor maps explains non-linear functional effects of lsd. Current Biology , 28(19):3065–3074, 2018. [114] Peng Wang, Ru Kong, Xiaolu Kong, Raphaël Liégeois, Csaba Orban, Gustavo Deco, Martijn P Van Den Heuvel, and BT Thomas Yeo. Inversion of a large-scale circuit model reveals a cortical hierarchy in the dynamic resting human brain. Science Advances , 5(1):eaat7854, 2019. [115] Laura E Suárez, Blake A Richards, Guillaume Lajoie, and Bratislav Misic. Learning function from structure in neu-romorphic networks. Nature Machine Intelligence , 3(9): 771–786, 2021. [116] Andrea I Luppi, S Parker Singleton, Justine Y Hansen, Keith W Jamison, Danilo Bzdok, Amy Kuceyeski, Richard F Betzel, and Bratislav Misic. Contributions of network structure, chemoarchitecture and diagnos-tic categories to transitions between cognitive topogra-phies. Nature Biomedical Engineering , 8(9):1142–1161, 2024. [117] ISTVAN Törk. Anatomy of the serotonergic system a. 

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences , 600(1):9– 34, 1990. [118] M-Marsel Mesulam and Changiz Geula. Nucleus basalis (ch4) and cortical cholinergic innervation in the human brain: observations based on the distribution of acetyl-cholinesterase and choline acetyltransferase. Journal of Comparative Neurology , 275(2):216–240, 1988. [119] Satoshi Ikemoto. Dopamine reward circuitry: two pro-jection systems from the ventral midbrain to the nucleus accumbens–olfactory tubercle complex. Brain Research Reviews , 56(1):27–78, 2007. [120] Susan J Sara. The locus coeruleus and noradrenergic modulation of cognition. Nature Reviews Neuroscience ,10(3):211–223, 2009. [121] Golia Shafiei, Yashar Zeighami, Crystal A Clark, Jen-nifer T Coull, Atsuko Nagano-Saito, Marco Leyton, Alain Dagher, and Bratislav Miši´ c. Dopamine signaling modu-lates the stability and integration of intrinsic brain net-works. Cerebral Cortex , 29(1):397–409, 2019. [122] Eric G Ceballos, Asa Farahani, Zhen-Qi Liu, Filip Mil-isav, Justine Y Hansen, Alain Dagher, and Bratislav Misic. Mapping neuropeptide signaling in the human brain. 

bioRxiv , pages 2024–12, 2024. [123] James M Shine. Neuromodulatory control of complex adaptive dynamics in the brain. Interface Focus , 13(3): 20220079, 2023. [124] Lea Tenenholz Grinberg, Udo Rueb, and Helmut Hein-sen. Brainstem: neglected locus in neurodegenerative diseases. Frontiers in Neurology , 2:42, 2011. [125] Kelvin C Luk, Victoria Kehm, Jenna Carroll, Bin Zhang, Patrick O’Brien, John Q Trojanowski, and Virginia M-Y Lee. Pathological α-synuclein transmission initi-ates parkinson-like neurodegeneration in nontransgenic mice. Science , 338(6109):949–953, 2012. [126] Ying-Qiu Zheng, Yu Zhang, Yvonne Yau, Yashar Zeighami, Kevin Larcher, Bratislav Misic, and Alain Dagher. Local vulnerability and global connectivity jointly shape neurodegenerative disease propagation. 

PLoS biology , 17(11):e3000495, 2019. [127] Christina Tremblay, Shady Rahayel, Andrew Vo, Filip Morys, Golia Shafiei, Nooshin Abbasi, Ross D Markello, Ziv Gan-Or, Bratislav Misic, and Alain Dagher. Brain at-rophy progression in parkinson’s disease is shaped by connectivity and local vulnerability. Brain Communica-tions , 3(4):fcab269, 2021. [128] Andrew Vo, Christina Tremblay, Shady Rahayel, Golia Shafiei, Justine Y Hansen, Yvonne Yau, Bratislav Misic, and Alain Dagher. Network connectivity and local tran-scriptomic vulnerability underpin cortical atrophy pro-gression in parkinson’s disease. NeuroImage: Clinical ,40:103523, 2023. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

[129] Andrew Vo, Christina Tremblay, Shady Rahayel, Sarah Al-Bachari, Henk W Berendse, Joanna K Bright, Fer-nando Cendes, Emile d’Angremont, John C Dalrymple-Alford, Ines Debove, et al. Global network and local vulnerabilities underlie brain atrophy across parkinson’s disease stages. Brain , page awaf432, 2025. [130] Joel C Watts, Kurt Giles, Abby Oehler, Lefkos Middleton, David T Dexter, Steve M Gentleman, Stephen J DeAr-mond, and Stanley B Prusiner. Transmission of mul-tiple system atrophy prions to transgenic mice. Pro-ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 110(48): 19555–19560, 2013. [131] Lydia Chougar, Christina Tremblay, Aline Delva, Marie Filiatrault, Andrew Vo, Justine Y Hansen, Asa Fara-hani, Bratislav Misic, Parsa Khalafi, Charles-Etienne Cas-tonguay, et al. Mri-derived atrophy in multiple system atrophy aligns with mitochondrial and glial gene expres-sion patterns. npj Parkinson’s Disease , 2025. [132] Sveva Fornari, Amelie Schäfer, Mathias Jucker, Alain Goriely, and Ellen Kuhl. Prion-like spreading of alzheimer’s disease within the brain’s connectome. Jour-nal of the Royal Society Interface , 16(159):20190356, 2019. [133] Golia Shafiei, Vincent Bazinet, Mahsa Dadar, Ana L Man-era, D Louis Collins, Alain Dagher, Barbara Borroni, Raquel Sanchez-Valle, Fermin Moreno, Robert Laforce Jr, et al. Network structure and transcriptomic vulnerability shape atrophy in frontotemporal dementia. Brain , 146 (1):321–336, 2023. [134] Magdalini Polymenidou and Don W Cleveland. The seeds of neurodegeneration: prion-like spreading in als. 

Cell , 147(3):498–508, 2011. [135] Asa Farahani, Justine Y Hansen, Vincent Bazinet, Go-lia Shafiei, D Louis Collins, Mahsa Dadar, Sanjay Kalra, Alain Dagher, and Bratislav Misic. Network spreading and local biological vulnerability in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Communications Biology , 8(1):1153, 2025. [136] Masami Masuda-Suzukake, Takashi Nonaka, Masato Hosokawa, Takayuki Oikawa, Tetsuaki Arai, Haruhiko Akiyama, David MA Mann, and Masato Hasegawa. Prion-like spreading of pathological α-synuclein in brain. Brain , 136(4):1128–1138, 2013. [137] Jason D Warren, Jonathan D Rohrer, Jonathan M Schott, Nick C Fox, John Hardy, and Martin N Rossor. Molecu-lar nexopathies: a new paradigm of neurodegenerative disease. Trends in Neurosciences , 36(10):561–569, 2013. [138] Jing L Guo and Virginia MY Lee. Cell-to-cell transmission of pathogenic proteins in neurodegenerative diseases. 

Nature Medicine , 20(2):130–138, 2014. [139] Per Borghammer, Jacob Horsager, Katrine Andersen, Nathalie Van Den Berge, Anna Raunio, Shigeo Mu-rayama, Laura Parkkinen, and Liisa Myllykangas. Neu-ropathological evidence of body-first vs. brain-first lewy body disease. Neurobiology of Disease , 161:105557, 2021. [140] Per Borghammer, Mie Kristine Just, Jacob Horsager, Casper Skjærbæk, Anna Raunio, Eloise H Kok, Sara Savola, Shigeo Murayama, Yuko Saito, Liisa Myllykan-gas, et al. A postmortem study suggests a revision of the dual-hit hypothesis of parkinson’s disease. npj Parkin-son’s Disease , 8(1):166, 2022. [141] Shady Rahayel, Bratislav Miši´ c, Ying-Qiu Zheng, Zhen-Qi Liu, Alaa Abdelgawad, Nooshin Abbasi, Anna Ca-puto, Bin Zhang, Angela Lo, Victoria Kehm, et al. Dif-ferentially targeted seeding reveals unique pathological alpha-synuclein propagation patterns. Brain , 145(5): 1743–1756, 2022. [142] Yasser Iturria-Medina, Roberto C Sotero, Paule J Tou-ssaint, Alan C Evans, and Alzheimer’s Disease Neu-roimaging Initiative. Epidemic spreading model to char-acterize misfolded proteins propagation in aging and as-sociated neurodegenerative disorders. PLoS computa-tional biology , 10(11):e1003956, 2014. [143] Ashish Raj, Amy Kuceyeski, and Michael Weiner. A net-work diffusion model of disease progression in demen-tia. Neuron , 73(6):1204–1215, 2012. [144] Jacob W Vogel, Nick Corriveau-Lecavalier, Nicolai Franzmeier, Joana B Pereira, Jesse A Brown, Anne Maass, Hugo Botha, William W Seeley, Dani S Bassett, David T Jones, et al. Connectome-based modelling of neurodegenerative diseases: towards precision medicine and mechanistic insight. Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 24 (10):620–639, 2023. [145] JG Greenfield and Frances D Bosanquet. The brain-stem lesions in parkinsonism. Journal of Neurology, Neuro-surgery, and Psychiatry , 16(4):213, 1953. [146] Heiko Braak, Kelly Del Tredici, Udo Rüb, Rob AI De Vos, Ernst NH Jansen Steur, and Eva Braak. Staging of brain pathology related to sporadic parkinson’s disease. Neu-robiology of Aging , 24(2):197–211, 2003. [147] Johannes Brettschneider, Kelly Del Tredici, Jon B Toledo, John L Robinson, David J Irwin, Murray Grossman, Eu-nRan Suh, Vivianna M Van Deerlin, Elisabeth M Wood, Young Baek, et al. Stages of ptdp-43 pathology in amy-otrophic lateral sclerosis. Annals of Neurology , 74(1): 20–38, 2013. [148] Johannes Brettschneider, Kimihito Arai, Kelly Del Tredici, Jon B Toledo, John L Robinson, Ed-ward B Lee, Satoshi Kuwabara, Kazumoto Shibuya, David J Irwin, Lubin Fang, et al. Tdp-43 pathology and neuronal loss in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis spinal cord. Acta Neuropathologica , 128(3):423–437, 2014. [149] Matthew D Cykowski, Hidehiro Takei, Paul E Schulz, Stanley H Appel, and Suzanne Z Powell. Tdp-43 pathol-ogy in the basal forebrain and hypothalamus of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Acta Neuropatholog-ica Communications , 2(1):171, 2014. [150] Kay Seidel, Josefine Mahlke, Sonny Siswanto, Reijko Krüger, Helmut Heinsen, Georg Auburger, Mohamed Bouzrou, Lea T Grinberg, Helmut Wicht, Horst-Werner Korf, et al. The brainstem pathologies of parkinson’s dis-ease and dementia with lewy bodies. Brain Pathology ,25(2):121–135, 2015. [151] Josef Parvizi, Gary W Van Hoesen, and Antonio Dama-sio. The selective vulnerability of brainstem nuclei to alzheimer’s disease. Annals of Neurology: Official Jour-nal of the American Neurological Association and the Child Neurology Society , 49(1):53–66, 2001. [152] Martina Bocchetta, Maura Malpetti, Emily G Todd, James B Rowe, and Jonathan D Rohrer. Looking beneath the surface: the importance of subcortical structures in frontotemporal dementia. Brain Communications , 3(3): fcab158, 2021. [153] Derek K Jones. Challenges and limitations of quantifying brain connectivity in vivo with diffusion mri. Imaging in Medicine , 2(3):341, 2010. [154] Klaus H Maier-Hein, Peter F Neher, Jean-Christophe Houde, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Eleftherios Garyfallidis, 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

Jidan Zhong, Maxime Chamberland, Fang-Cheng Yeh, Ying-Chia Lin, Qing Ji, et al. The challenge of mapping the human connectome based on diffusion tractography. 

Nature Communications , 8(1):1349, 2017. [155] Derek K Jones. Studying connections in the living hu-man brain with diffusion mri. Cortex , 44(8):936–952, 2008. [156] Saad Jbabdi, Stamatios N Sotiropoulos, Suzanne NHaber, David C Van Essen, and Timothy E Behrens. Mea-suring macroscopic brain connections in vivo. Nature Neuroscience , 18(11):1546–1555, 2015. [157] Robert E Smith, Jacques-Donald Tournier, Fernando Calamante, and Alan Connelly. Anatomically-constrained tractography: improved diffusion mri streamlines tractography through effective use of anatomical information. Neuroimage , 62(3):1924– 1938, 2012. [158] Robert E Smith, Jacques-Donald Tournier, Fernando Calamante, and Alan Connelly. Sift: Spherical-deconvolution informed filtering of tractograms. Neu-roimage , 67:298–312, 2013. [159] Boris Keil, Christina Triantafyllou, Michael Hamm, and Lawrence L Wald. Design optimization of a 32-channel head coil at 7t. In Proceedings of the International Soci-ety for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine , volume 18, page 1493, 2010. [160] José V Manjón, Pierrick Coupé, Luis Concha, Antonio Buades, D Louis Collins, and Montserrat Robles. Diffu-sion weighted image denoising using overcomplete local pca. PloS one , 8(9):e73021, 2013. [161] Brian B Avants, Nicholas J Tustison, Jue Wu, Philip A Cook, and James C Gee. An open source multivariate framework for n-tissue segmentation with evaluation on public data. Neuroinformatics , 9(4):381–400, 2011. [162] Christophe Destrieux, Bruce Fischl, Anders Dale, and Eric Halgren. Automatic parcellation of human cortical gyri and sulci using standard anatomical nomenclature. 

Neuroimage , 53(1):1–15, 2010. [163] Wolfgang M Pauli, Amanda N Nili, and J Michael Tyszka. A high-resolution probabilistic in vivo atlas of human subcortical brain nuclei. Scientific Data , 5(1):180063, 2018. [164] Robert W Cox. Afni: software for analysis and vi-sualization of functional magnetic resonance neuroim-ages. Computers and Biomedical Research , 29(3):162– 173, 1996. [165] Rasmus M Birn, Monica A Smith, Tyler B Jones, and Peter A Bandettini. The respiration response function: the temporal dynamics of fmri signal fluctuations related to changes in respiration. Neuroimage , 40(2):644–654, 2008. [166] Catie Chang, John P Cunningham, and Gary H Glover. Influence of heart rate on the bold signal: the cardiac response function. Neuroimage , 44(3):857–869, 2009. [167] Ajay B Satpute, Tor D Wager, Julien Cohen-Adad, Marta Bianciardi, Ji-Kyung Choi, Jason T Buhle, Lawrence L Wald, and Lisa Feldman Barrett. Identification of dis-crete functional subregions of the human periaqueduc-tal gray. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,110(42):17101–17106, 2013. [168] Marta Bianciardi, Nicola Toschi, Cornelius Eichner, Jonathan R Polimeni, Kawin Setsompop, Emery NBrown, Matti S Hämäläinen, Bruce R Rosen, and Lawrence L Wald. In vivo functional connectome of human brainstem nuclei of the ascending arousal, au-tonomic, and motor systems by high spatial resolution 7-tesla fmri. Magnetic Resonance Materials in Physics, Bi-ology and Medicine , 29:451–462, 2016. [169] Wolfgang M Pauli, Amanda N Nili, and J Michael Tyszka. A high-resolution probabilistic in vivo atlas of human subcortical brain nuclei. Scientific Data , 5(1):1–13, 2018. [170] María G García-Gomar, Christian Strong, Nicola Toschi, Kavita Singh, Bruce R Rosen, Lawrence L Wald, and Marta Bianciardi. In vivo probabilistic structural atlas of the inferior and superior colliculi, medial and lateral geniculate nuclei and superior olivary complex in hu-mans based on 7 tesla mri. Frontiers in Neuroscience , 13: 764, 2019. [171] G Paxinos, X Huang, G Sengul, and C Watson. Organi-zation of brainstem nuclei. the human nervous system. 

The Human Nervous System , pages 260–327, 2012. [172] J-Donald Tournier, Fernando Calamante, and Alan Con-nelly. Mrtrix: diffusion tractography in crossing fiber regions. International Journal of Imaging Systems and Technology , 22(1):53–66, 2012. [173] J-Donald Tournier, Fernando Calamante, and Alan Con-nelly. Robust determination of the fibre orientation dis-tribution in diffusion mri: non-negativity constrained super-resolved spherical deconvolution. Neuroimage , 35 (4):1459–1472, 2007. [174] J-Donald Tournier, Fernando Calamante, and Alan Connelly. Determination of the appropriate b value and number of gradient directions for high-angular-resolution diffusion-weighted imaging. NMR in Biomedicine , 26(12):1775–1786, 2013. [175] J Donald Tournier, Fernando Calamante, Alan Connelly, et al. Improved probabilistic streamlines tractography by 2nd order integration over fibre orientation distribu-tions. In Proceedings of the international society for mag-netic resonance in medicine , volume 1670. Stockholm, 2010. [176] James A Roberts, Alistair Perry, Gloria Roberts, Philip B Mitchell, and Michael Breakspear. Consistency-based thresholding of the human connectome. Neuroimage ,145:118–129, 2017. [177] Marcel A de Reus and Martijn P van den Heuvel. Esti-mating false positives and negatives in brain networks. 

Neuroimage , 70:402–409, 2013. [178] Derek K Jones, Thomas R Knösche, and Robert Turner. White matter integrity, fiber count, and other fallacies: the do’s and don’ts of diffusion mri. Neuroimage , 73: 239–254, 2013. [179] Cibu Thomas, Frank Q Ye, M Okan Irfanoglu, Pooja Modi, Kadharbatcha S Saleem, David A Leopold, and Carlo Pierpaoli. Anatomical accuracy of brain connec-tions derived from diffusion mri tractography is inher-ently limited. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-ences , 111(46):16574–16579, 2014. [180] Richard F Betzel, Andrea Avena-Koenigsberger, Joaquín Goñi, Ye He, Marcel A De Reus, Alessandra Griffa, Pe-tra E Vértes, Bratislav Mišic, Jean-Philippe Thiran, Patric Hagmann, et al. Generative models of the human con-nectome. Neuroimage , 124:1054–1064, 2016. [181] Zhen-Qi Liu, Vincent Bazinet, Justine Y Hansen, Filip Milisav, Andrea I Luppi, Eric G Ceballos, Asa Farahani, Laura E Suarez, Golia Shafiei, Ross D Markello, et al. netneurotools: a trainee-oriented approach to network 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

neuroscience. bioRxiv , pages 2025–09, 2025. [182] František Váša and Bratislav Miši´ c. Null models in net-work neuroscience. Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 23(8): 493–504, 2022. [183] David C Van Essen, Matthew F Glasser, Donna L Dierker, John Harwell, and Timothy Coalson. Parcellations and hemispheric asymmetries of human cerebral cortex ana-lyzed on surface-based atlases. Cerebral Cortex , 22(10): 2241–2262, 2012. [184] Rudolf Nieuwenhuys. The myeloarchitectonic studies on the human cerebral cortex of the vogt–vogt school, and their significance for the interpretation of functional neuroimaging data. Brain Structure and Function , 218: 303–352, 2013. [185] Stefan Van Der Walt, S Chris Colbert, and Gael Varo-quaux. The numpy array: a structure for efficient nu-merical computation. Computing in Science & Engineer-ing , 13(2):22–30, 2011. [186] Charles R Harris, K Jarrod Millman, Stéfan J Van Der Walt, Ralf Gommers, Pauli Virtanen, David Cour-napeau, Eric Wieser, Julian Taylor, Sebastian Berg, Nathaniel J Smith, et al. Array programming with numpy. Nature , 585(7825):357–362, 2020. [187] Pauli Virtanen, Ralf Gommers, Travis E Oliphant, Matt Haberland, Tyler Reddy, David Cournapeau, Evgeni Burovski, Pearu Peterson, Warren Weckesser, Jonathan Bright, et al. Scipy 1.0: fundamental algorithms for scientific computing in python. Nature Methods , 17(3): 261–272, 2020. [188] Wes McKinney et al. Data structures for statistical com-puting in python. SciPy , 445(1):51–56, 2010. [189] Michael L. Waskom. seaborn: statistical data visual-ization. Journal of Open Source Software , 6(60):3021, 2021. doi:10.21105/joss.03021. URL https://doi.org/ 10.21105/joss.03021. [190] John D Hunter. Matplotlib: A 2d graphics environment. 

Computing in Science & Engineering , 9(03):90–95, 2007. [191] Skipper Seabold and Josef Perktold. statsmodels: Econo-metric and statistical modeling with python. In 9th Python in Science Conference , 2010. [192] Alexandre Abraham, Fabian Pedregosa, Michael Eicken-berg, Philippe Gervais, Andreas Mueller, Jean Kossaifi, Alexandre Gramfort, Bertrand Thirion, and Gaël Varo-quaux. Machine learning for neuroimaging with scikit-learn. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics , 8:14, 2014. [193] Matthew Brett, Christopher J. Markiewicz, Michael Hanke, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Ben Cipollini, Paul McCarthy, Dorota Jarecka, Christopher P. Cheng, Yaroslav O. Halchenko, Michiel Cottaar, Eric Larson, Satrajit Ghosh, Demian Wassermann, Stephan Ger-hard, Gregory R. Lee, Hao-Ting Wang, Erik Kast-man, Jakub Kaczmarzyk, Roberto Guidotti, Jonathan Daniel, Or Duek, Ariel Rokem, Cindee Madison, Bren-dan Moloney, Félix C. Morency, Mathias Goncalves, Ross Markello, Cameron Riddell, Anibal Sólon, Christopher Burns, Jarrod Millman, Alexandre Gramfort, Jaakko Leppäkangas, Jasper J.F. van den Bosch, Robert D. Vincent, Henry Braun, Krish Subramaniam, Dim-itri Papadopoulos Orfanos, Andrew Van, Krzysztof J. Gorgolewski, Pradeep Reddy Raamana, Julian Klug, B. Nolan Nichols, Eric M. Baker, Soichi Hayashi, Basile Pinsard, Christian Haselgrove, Mark Hymers, Os-car Esteban, Serge Koudoro, Fernando Pérez-García, Jérôme Dockès, Nikolaas N. Oosterhof, Bago Amir-bekian, Ian Nimmo-Smith, Ly Nguyen, Samir Red-digari, Samuel St-Jean, Egor Panfilov, Eleftherios Garyfallidis, Gael Varoquaux, Jon Haitz Legarreta, Kevin S. Hahn, Lea Waller, Oliver P. Hinds, Bennet Fauber, Jacob Roberts, Jean-Baptiste Poline, Jon Stut-ters, Kesshi Jordan, Matthew Cieslak, Miguel Este-van Moreno, Tomáš Hrnˇ ciar, Valentin Haenel, Yannick Schwartz, Zvi Baratz, Benjamin C Darwin, Bertrand Thirion, Carl Gauthier, Igor Solovey, Ivan Gonzalez, Jath Palasubramaniam, Justin Lecher, Katrin Leinwe-ber, Konstantinos Raktivan, Markéta Calábková, Pe-ter Fischer, Philippe Gervais, Syam Gadde, Thomas Ballinger, Thomas Roos, Venkateswara Reddy Reddam, and freec84. nipy/nibabel:, June 2022. URL https: //doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6658382. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint 23 

Figure S1. Inter-subject similarity of structural connectome (SC) | Structural connectivity patterns are compared across partici-pants using Spearman correlation ( ρ). For each pair of participants, we correlate (1) vectorized upper-triangular within-brainstem SC, (2) vectorized brainstem-cortex SC, and (3) vectorized upper-triangular within-cortex SC. Heatmaps show the resulting inter-subject similarity matrices. Inter-subject similarity is higher for within-brainstem ( ¯ρ = 0 .67 ) and within-cortex SC ( ¯ρ = 0 .64 ) than for brainstem-cortex SC ( ¯ρ = 0 .50 ). 

Figure S2. Brainstem-to-cortex connectivity after controlling for nucleus volume | After computing the weighted structural connectivity of each brainstem nucleus across all cortical regions (a, right), we regressed out the nonlinear effect of parcel volume (estimated by voxel count) (a, left) from the weighted degree. (b) Cortex-to-brainstem weighted degree after controlling for nucleus volume. 

Figure S3. Von Economo’s cytoarchitectonic classes | The von Economo cytoarchitectonic parcellation 49–51 is displayed on fs-LR midthickness cortical surfaces. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

Figure S4. Similarity of cortex-to-brainstem and cortex-to-cortex structural connectivity weighted degree | (a) Cortex-to-brainstem weighted degree. (b) Cortex-to-cortex weighted degree. Brain cortical maps are displayed on fs-LR midthickness cortical surfaces. (c) The scatter plot shows the cortex-to-brainstem weighted degree on the x-axis and cortex-to-cortex weighted degree on the y-axis. The Spearman correlation between the two is equal to 0.65 (pspin = 9 .99 × 10 −4, Nspin = 1 000 ). 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint 25 

Figure S5. Connection profiles of brainstem nuclei with subcortex and diencephalon | Top: Sagittal and coronal views of brainstem, subcortical and diencephalon nuclei are shown. Edges show structural connections between brainstem nuclei and sub-cortical and diencephalic nuclei. Bottom: The heatmap shows the structural connectivity of brainstem nuclei with subcortical and diencephalic nuclei. For bilateral structures, connectivity values are averaged across the left and right hemispheres. Abbreviations used throughout this figure include STh: subthalamic nucleus, HTH: hypothalamus, LG: lateral geniculate nucleus, and MG: medial geniculate nucleus. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 

Figure S6. Association between structural and functional connectivity | (a) Group-consensus weighted structural connectivity (SC) matrix. (b) Group-averaged functional connectivity (FC) matrix. (c) The scatter plot shows the edge-wise relationship between SC and FC. Each dot represents a single edge. Spearman correlation coefficients are reported for each compartment (within-brainstem: ρ = 0 .42 , prewired = 9 .99 × 10 −4, Nrewired = 1 000 ); between brainstem and cortex: ρ = 0 .12 , prewired =9.99 × 10 −4, Nrewired = 1 000 ); and within-cortex: ρ = 0 .32 , prewired = 9 .99 × 10 −4, Nrewired = 1 000 ). Diagonal elements and edges with zero SC were excluded from correlation analyses. Reported p-values are obtained by comparing empirical structure-function correlations with a null distribution of correlations between degree- and length-preserving structural network nulls and empirical FC. Fisher’s z tests show that correlation between SC and FC is stronger within brainstem than between brainstem and cortex ( Z = 9 .884 , p ≈ 0), and it is also stronger than SC and FC correlation within cortex ( Z = 3 .461 , p = 5 .37 × 10 −4). (d) Distribution of subject-level Spearman correlation coefficients between SC and FC, computed separately within each network compartment. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

Figure S7. Similarity of Euclidean distance and streamline length between brain regions | (a) Euclidean distance between brain regions. (b) Streamline length between brain regions. For each edge, the median value across 19 individuals is shown. (c) The scatterplot shows the correspondence between Euclidean distance ( y-axis) and streamline length ( x-axis) across brain regions. Edges with a median streamline length of zero across individuals are excluded from the plot. We use the Euclidean distance matrix when generating degree- and edge length-preserving rewired structural networks 55 . This choice is motivated by sparsity of the streamline length matrix (panel b), which cannot be directly used in the rewiring algorithm. Fig. 1a also shows region pairs with no streamline connecting them. 

Figure S8. Cortical structural connectivity supports its functional connectivity | Cortex-cortex functional connectivity is stronger for structurally connected region pairs than for not-connected pairs. Statistical significance of the difference in mean functional connectivity between connected and not-connected region pairs is assessed against a null distribution of differences (∆FC) generated when degree- and edge length-preserving rewired structural networks ( Nrewired = 1 000 ) are used to define anatomical connectivity 55 .

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

Figure S9. Association between structural connectivity and distance and volume of seed and target regions | (a) Group-consensus structural connectivity (SC) matrix. (b) Distance matrix. Each edge in this matrix represents the Euclidean distance between regional centroids. (c) Volume matrix. Each edge in this matrix represents the product of voxel counts for each pair of regions. (d) The scatter plot shows SC as a function of Euclidean distance between regional centroids (within-brainstem ρ = −0.16 ,

p = 1 .94 × 10 −6; between brainstem and cortex ρ = −0.05 , p = 0 .01 ; and within-cortex ρ = −0.55 , p ≈ 0). (e) The scatter plot shows SC as a function of regional volumes (within-brainstem ρ = 0 .37 , p = 9 .89 × 10 −29 ; between brainstem and cortex ρ = 0 .25 ,

p = 2 .32 × 10 −36 ; and within-cortex ρ = 0 .03 , p = 5 .53 × 10 −5). Diagonal elements and edges with zero SC were excluded from correlation analyses. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

Figure S10. Association between functional connectivity and distance and volume of seed and target regions | (a) Group-averaged functional connectivity (FC) matrix. (b) Distance matrix. Each edge in this matrix represents the Euclidean distance between regional centroids. (c) Volume matrix. Each edge in this matrix represents the product of voxel counts for each pair of regions. Diagonal elements represent the voxel count of individual regions. (d) The scatter plot shows FC as a function of Euclidean distance between regional centroids (within-brainstem ρ = −0.11 , p = 1 .56 × 10 −5; between brainstem and cortex 

ρ = 0 .04 , p = 4 .59 × 10 −8; and within-cortex ρ = −0.30 , p ≈ 0). (e) The scatter plot shows FC as a function of regional volumes (within-brainstem ρ = 0 .65 , p ≈ 0; between brainstem and cortex ρ = 0 .60 , p ≈ 0; and within-cortex ρ = −0.013 , p = 2 .99 ×10 −4). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

Figure S11. Structural and functional coupling between brainstem and cortex in individual subjects | For each individual, we replicated the analysis explained in the caption of Fig. 4. The pooled result across all 19 individuals is shown on the right column and on the brainstem template. 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint 31 

Figure S12. Structural and functional coupling within brainstem | (a) The two leftmost heatmaps show resting-state functional connectivity (FC) and structural communicability between pairs of brainstem nuclei. The third heatmap shows the Euclidean distance between each pair of brainstem nuclei. The fourth heatmap shows the product of the number of voxels for each pair of brainstem nuclei, providing an estimate of their combined volumetric size. (b) We construct two regression models to predict the FC profile of each brainstem nucleus with other brainstem nuclei. The baseline model includes distance and volume regressors and the extended model includes distance, volume and structural communicability profile of the nucleus as regressors. Left: In the scatter plot, baseline model R2 values are shown on the x−axis and extended model R2 values are shown on the y−axis. Each dot in the scatter plot corresponds to a brainstem nucleus. We assess the significance of improvement in model performance ( ∆R2) by comparing the empirical ∆R2 value to a null distribution of ∆R2 values obtained from models in which structural communicability is replaced by a communicability matrix that is obtained from degree- and length-preserving null structural networks. Brainstem nuclei showing a significant increase in R2 when empirical structural communicability is included in the model are shown in pink. Right: The ∆R2 values for brainstem nuclei are mapped onto the sagittal and coronal views of the brainstem. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32 

Figure S13. Correspondence of nuclei that show the largest improvement in FC prediction when SC is included in the model | The scatter plot shows the ∆R2 values for brainstem-cortex ( x-axis) and brainstem-brainstem connectivity ( y-axis). 

.CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint 33 

Brainstem nucleus name Bilateral nuclei Midline nuclei 

Cuneiform nucleus Caudal-rostral linear raphe Inferior colliculus Dorsal raphe Inferior medullary reticular formation Median raphe Inferior olivary nucleus Periaqueductal gray Isthmic reticular formation Paramedian nucleus Locus coeruleus Raphe magnus Laterodorsal tegmental nucleus - central gray of the rhombencephalon Raphe obscurus Lateral parabrachial nucleus Raphe pallidus Microcellular tegmental nucleus – parabigeminal nucleus Medial parabrachial nucleus Mesencephalic reticular formation Parvicellular reticular nucleus Alpha part Pontine reticular nucleus, oral and caudal parts (pontis oralis and caudalis) Pedunculotegmental nucleus (Pedunculopontine nucleus) Red nucleus - subregion 1

Red nucleus - subregion 2

Superior colliculus Superior medullary reticular formation Substantia nigra - subregion 1, compatible with reticulata Substantia nigra - subregion 2, compatible with compacta Superior olivary complex Subcoeruleus Vestibular nuclei complex Viscero-sensory-motor nuclei complex Ventral tegmental area – parabrachial pigmented nucleus complex TABLE S1. Gray matter regions labeled in the Brainstem Navigator atlas | The Brainstem Navigator atlas includes 58 brainstem nuclei ( 50 bilateral and eight midline nuclei) 38–43 . Atlas is available at https://www.nitrc.org/projects/brainstemnavig. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 7, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.05.716603 doi: bioRxiv preprint

34 

Neurosynth terms 

action adaptation addiction anticipation anxiety arousal association attention autobiographical_memory balance belief categorization cognitive_control communication competition concept consciousness consolidation context coordination decision decision_making detection discrimination distraction eating efficiency effort emotion emotion_regulation empathy encoding episodic_memory expectancy expertise extinction face_recognition facial_expression familiarity fear fixation focus gaze goal hyperactivity imagery impulsivity induction inference inhibition insight integration intelligence intention interference judgment knowledge language language_comprehension learning listening localization loss maintenance manipulation meaning memory memory_retrieval mental_imagery monitoring mood morphology motor_control movement multisensory naming navigation object_recognition pain perception planning priming psychosis reading reasoning recall recognition rehearsal reinforcement_learning response inhibition response_selection retention retrieval reward_anticipation rhythm risk rule salience search selective_attention semantic_memory sentence_comprehension skill sleep social_cognition spatial_attention speech_perception speech_production strategy strength stress sustained_attention task_difficulty thought uncertainty updating utility valence verbal_fluency visual_attention visual_perception word_recognition working_memory TABLE S2. Neurosynth terms | List of the 123 Neurosynth terms used in this study 53,54 .