Title: Triple Configuration of Brain Networks Based on Recurrent Neural Networks: The Synergistic Effects of Exogenous Stimuli, Task Demands, and Spontaneous Activity

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.23525v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Apr 2026 00:58:49 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
# Triple Configuration of Brain Networks Based on Recurrent Neural Networks: The Synergistic Effects of Exogenous Stimuli, Task Demands, and Spontaneous Activity 

Binghao Yang 

School of Future Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences Beijing 101408, China 

yangbinghao@xwhosp.org 

Guangzong Chen 

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering University of Pittsburgh Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA 

guangzong@pitt.edu 

# Abstract 

The foundation of cognitive flexibility and higher-order intelligence lies in the functional structure and activity of brain networks, which can be dynamically con-figured by both external environments and internal states. However, decoding these dynamics from high-dimensional neural data remains a challenge. In this study, we propose a computational framework using Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) with neural dynamic constraints to model source-localized resting-state EEG data from 114 participants. We aim to clarify the “triple brain network configurations” driven by exogenous and endogenous factors, including external stimuli, informa-tion processing tasks, and spontaneous activities. Our model identifies the parietal network as a critical hub supporting these multiple configuration patterns. Fur-thermore, we reveal that the anterior and posterior parietal regions exhibit distinct functional specializations under different stimulus modalities. By formalizing a triple configuration framework, this work separates latent factors of brain dynamics and underscores the computational significance of parietal regions in orchestrating higher-order intelligence. 

# 1 Introduction 

As a dynamic system, the brain continuously receives and processes external information while performing multiple cognitive functions [ 4, 35 ]. It exhibits highly complex activity patterns for encoding and processing information [ 11 ], and can flexibly transition between distinct cognitive tasks and contexts [ 31 , 30 , 22 ]. Such cognitive processing relies on the recruitment of distributed brain regions, effectively manifesting as the dynamic configuration of brain networks [ 38 ]. The ability to selectively recruit brain regions to meet varying cognitive demands serves as the foundation of the brain’s complexity and flexibility. Specifically, the configuration of brain networks is crucial for the processing of complex informa-tion and higher-order cognitive functions across multiple domains, including sensory processing, attention, learning, and memory. For instance, interactions between the insula and temporal net-

> Preprint.
> arXiv:2604.23525v1 [q-bio.NC] 26 Apr 2026

works enable the brain to decompose information within complex auditory environments [ 3, 8]. Similarly, attention modulates visual network configuration to amplify the encoding of specific features in visual input [ 16 ], while learning processes in uncertain environments involve the recon-figuration of the frontoparietal network [ 24 , 23 ]. Furthermore, the configuration within the limbic network—specifically the interaction between the hippocampus and the amygdala—supports memory processing distinctively during the encoding and retrieval phases [6, 20]. However, several key questions remain elusive. Given the complexity of cognition, network configu-ration is influenced by multifarious factors. For example, the concurrent presence of primary sensory responses and higher-order cognitive processing following task-related stimuli makes it difficult to disentangle their respective contributions to network configuration. Isolating these factors is essential for clarifying the specific roles of brain networks in stimulus response versus cognitive processing. Additionally, in natural environments, brain networks must accommodate multiple inputs and tasks, a process further modulated by the brain’s intrinsic state [ 38 ]. The network mechanisms enabling adaptation to such diverse demands, as well as their relationship with spontaneous brain activity, remain unclear. In this study, by employing recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to model neural dynamics from resting-state EEG and subjecting these biologically constrained models to various external inputs and cognitive tasks, we propose a “triple configuration framework” governing brain networks via exogenous and endogenous effects. For a detailed description of the study pipeline and the triple configuration framework, refer to Appendix A (Figure 6). 

# 2 Materials and Methods 

2.1 Participants, EEG Recording, Preprocessing, and Source Localization 

We recruited 114 participants for this study. EEG data were recorded using a 64 -channel system and preprocessed using standard pipelines, including filtering and Independent Component Analysis (ICA) for artifact removal. Detailed information regarding participants, data acquisition, preprocessing, and source localization is provided in Appendix A. 

2.2 Recurrent Neural Network Model Training 

We trained a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) to predict individual source-localized EEG signals at time t + 1 given the input at time t. The RNN model comprised a fully connected population of 200 

hidden units receiving a 68 × 1 input vector, where each dimension corresponded to the signal from a single brain region. The hidden unit activity was governed by: 

ht = f (Wih xt + bih + Whh ht−1) (1) where f (·) is the hyperbolic tangent activation function ( tanh ), ht ∈ R200 represents the hidden state, xt ∈ R68 is the input EEG signal at time t, Whh ∈ R200 ×200 is the recurrent weight matrix, and Wih ∈ R200 ×68 is the input weight matrix. The output was computed as: 

ypred (t) = Wout ht (2) where ypred (t) ∈ R68 denotes the predicted EEG signal at time t + 1 , and Wout ∈ R68 ×200 is the output weight matrix. EEG data were divided into 10 -second segments ( 2500 data points) with 75% 

overlap; segments with significant artifacts were excluded. At time t, given the EEG signals in the interval [t, t + 2500] , the RNN model was trained to predict the EEG signals at the next time step. This training procedure allowed the RNN to learn the intrinsic neural dynamics of the EEG signals, providing a biologically plausible model for analyzing triple brain network configurations. Prior to training, all model parameters were initialized with random values drawn from a standard Gaussian distribution N (0 , 1) . The training batch size was set to 64 , and the model was trained for 4000 iterations using Backpropagation Through Time (BPTT) [ 27 ] with the Adam optimizer (learning rate 2 × 10 −3). The objective was to minimize the Mean Squared Error (MSE) across all training data segments: MSE = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1
> T

X

> t=1

(yi(t) − ypred ,i (t)) 2 (3) 2Figure 1: Stimulus-driven network configuration under auditory cortex input. (A) Functional connec-tivity patterns under white noise input with bilateral correlation 1. Upper-Left: pairwise whole brain connectivity; Upper-right: sub-network connectivity; Lower-left: averaged seed-point connectivity of sub-networks. Lower-right: seed-point connectivity mapping on the whole brain. (B) Same as (A) under white noise input with bilateral correlation 0. (C) Same as (A) under 40 Hz input. (D) Network configuration by the change of correlated characteristic (Noise correlation 1 vs Noise correlation 0). Left: seed-point connectivity configuration of sub-networks; Middle: seed-point connectivity configuration mapping on the whole brain; Right: pairwise connectivity configuration of the whole brain. (E) Same as (D) by the change of periodic characteristic (Noise correlation 1 vs 40 Hz). (F) Left: Stimulus-driven common network by combining (D) and (E); Upper-right: Network only configured by the change of correlated characteristic; Lower-right: Network only configured by the change of periodic characteristic. (G) Same as (F) shown at the pairwise connectivity level. * 

p < 0.05 after Bonferroni correction. 

Figure 2: Task-driven network configuration under auditory cortex input. (A) Network configuration performing integration task under the input of white noise with correlation 0. Left: seed-point connectivity configuration of sub-networks; Right: seed-point connectivity configuration mapping on the whole brain. (B) Same as (A) under the input of 40 Hz with phase lag 90 ◦. (C) Network configuration performing separation task under the input of white noise with correlation 0. Left: seed-point connectivity configuration of sub-networks; Right: seed-point connectivity configuration mapping on the whole brain. (D) Same as (C) under the input of 40 Hz with phase lag 90 ◦. (E) Upper: Task-driven common network by combining (A) - (D); Lower-left: Network only configured by the integration task; Lower-right: Network only configured by the separation task. * p < 0.05 

after Bonferroni correction. 3Figure 3: Spontaneous-activity network configuration under auditory cortex input. (A) Schematic of similarity analysis, i.e. calculating the correlation coefficient between stimulus-driven functional connectivity and resting-state functional connectivity. (B) Similarity analysis across five frequency bands: delta ( 1 − 4 Hz), theta ( 4 − 8 Hz), alpha ( 8 − 12 Hz), beta ( 12 − 30 Hz), and gamma (30 − 45 Hz). Upper: Similarity with functional connectivity under white noise input. Lower: Similarity with functional connectivity under 40 Hz input. (C) Stimulus-task common network combining Figure 1(F) and Figure 2(E). (D) Correlation of common network configuration patterns. Upper: different types of stimulus input; Lower: different types of tasks. (E) Comparison between the degree of brain regions in the common network and the whole-brain averaged degree. Upper: alpha band; Lower: beta band. * p < 0.05 after Bonferroni correction; *** p < 0.001 .

Figure 4: Elimination experiment. (A) Change of the model performance (measured by the corre-lation coefficient between model output signal and target signal) under control condition (without elimination), random-disturbed condition (eliminating read-out weights randomly) and common network disturbed condition (eliminating read-out weights corresponding with the common network) in the integration task. (B) Same as (A) in the separation task. *** p < 0.001 after Bonferroni correction; 4Figure 5: Triple network configuration under visual cortex input. (A)-(D) Stimulus-driven configura-tion. (A) Network configuration by the change of correlated characteristic (Noise correlation 1 vs Noise correlation 0). Left: seed-point connectivity configuration of sub-networks; Middle: seed-point connectivity configuration mapping on the whole brain; Right: pairwise connectivity configuration of the whole brain. (B) Same as (A) by the change of periodic characteristic (Noise correlation 1 vs 40 Hz). (C) Left: Stimulus-driven common network by combining (A) and (B); Upper-right: Network only configured by the change of correlated characteristic; Lower-right: Network only configured by the change of periodic characteristic. (D) Same as (C) shown at the pairwise connectivity level. (E)-(I) Task-driven configuration. (E) Network configuration performing integration task under the input of white noise with correlation 0. Left: seed-point connectivity configuration of sub-networks; Right: seed-point connectivity configuration mapping on the whole brain. (F) Same as (E) under the input of 40Hz with phase lag 90°. (G) Network configuration performing separation task under the input of white noise with correlation 0. Left: seed-point connectivity configuration of sub-networks; Right: seed-point connectivity configuration mapping on the whole brain. (H) Same as (G) under the input of 40Hz with phase lag 90°. (I) Upper: Task-driven common network by combining (E) - (H); Lower-left: Network only configured by the integration task; Lower-right: Network only configured by the separation task. (J)-(M) Spontaneous-activity configuration. (J) Stimulus-task common network combining (C) and (I). (K) Correlation of common network configuration patterns. Upper: different types of stimulus input; Lower: different types of tasks. (L) Comparison between the degree of brain regions in the common network and the whole-brain averaged degree. Upper: alpha band; Lower: beta band. (M) Elimination experiment. Upper: integration task; Lower: separation task. * p <0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001 after Bonferroni correction. 5where N indicates the batch size ( 64 ). yi(t) represents the ground truth EEG signal, and ypred ,i (t)

denotes the predicted signal. The model implementation and parameter updates were performed using PyTorch [34]. 

2.3 Stimulus Design 

To simulate different sensory modalities, we designated the bilateral transverse temporal regions (auditory cortex) as auditory input nodes and the bilateral lateral occipital regions (visual cortex) as visual input nodes. We examined the impact of stimulus characteristics by generating four stimulus types: (1) aperiodic white noise with perfect bilateral correlation ( r = 1 ); (2) uncorrelated aperiodic white noise ( r = 0 ); (3) periodic 40 Hz signals with zero phase lag; and (4) periodic 40 Hz signals with a 90 ◦ phase lag. Our analysis focused on two dimensions: periodic characteristics (white noise vs. 40 Hz) and correlation characteristics (correlated vs. uncorrelated). 

2.4 Stimulus-Driven Network Configuration Analysis 

We analyzed the impact of stimulus characteristics on brain network configuration. Stimuli were applied to RNN input channels corresponding to auditory, visual, or combined regions. The RNN out-put reflected the network response under learned neural dynamic constraints. Functional connectivity was evaluated using pairwise Pearson correlation coefficients of the output signals. We computed seed-based connectivity from the input regions to the rest of the brain. By comparing connectivity patterns between different stimulus conditions (e.g., correlated vs. uncorrelated noise), we identified brain regions exhibiting significant connectivity changes. The “stimulus-driven common network” was defined as the set of regions showing configuration changes under both periodic and correlation manipulations. 

2.5 Task-Driven Network Configuration Analysis 

We further investigated network configuration under specific information processing tasks. A readout layer ( 68 × 1) was added to the RNN to generate a scalar output ytarget :Output = βT ypred (4) where β represents the readout weights, interpretable as regional activation. Two tasks were defined: (1) Integration, where the target was the sum of bilateral inputs; and (2) Separation, where the target was the difference. Readout weights were optimized using least squares. Significant weights identified task-specific activation patterns. The “task-driven common network” comprised regions activated by both integration and separation tasks. Combining this with the stimulus-driven network yielded the “stimulus-task common network”. 

2.6 Spontaneous-Activity Network Configuration Analysis 

We computed the Phase Locking Value (PLV) [ 5 , 36 ] of resting-state EEG to characterize spontaneous functional connectivity. Signals were band-pass filtered into five frequency bands (delta to gamma). The PLV between signals s1(t) and s2(t) was calculated using their analytic signals zi(t) obtained via the Hilbert transform: HT (si(t)) = 1

π

Z ∞−∞ 

si(τ )

t − τ dτ (5) The phase difference was computed as: 

∆ϕ(t) = arg 

 z1(t)z∗ 

> 2

(t)

|z1(t)|| z2(t)|



(6) where * denotes the complex conjugate and | · | represents the modulus of the complex number. The PLV was defined as: PLV = 1

N

> N

X

> t=1

ej∆ϕ(t) (7) PLV ranges from 0 to 1, where 0 represents no phase synchrony and 1 represents perfect phase synchrony. The PLV was calculated in five frequency bands: delta ( 1 − 4 Hz), theta ( 4 − 8 Hz), alpha (8 − 12 Hz), beta ( 12 − 30 Hz), and gamma ( 30 − 45 Hz). 6We compared the similarity between the stimulus-configured network and the spontaneous activity network by calculating the correlation coefficient between the functional connectivity matrix under the white noise/ 40 Hz input and the spontaneous PLV matrix. Then we constructed the connectivity graph from the PLV matrix with significant similarity. The nodes of the graph correspond to the brain regions, and the connections greater than 0.6 in the PLV matrix were conserved as the edges of the graph. We calculated the degree of nodes corresponding to the brain regions in the stimulus-task common network to illustrate the role of the spontaneous activity configuration on the common network. 

2.7 Analysis Under Different Brain States 

As a supplementary analysis, we compared the stimulus-task configuration patterns between the drowsiness state (postprandial somnolence/sleep deprivation) and the wakefulness state to assess the influence of brain state changes on brain network configuration. To do this, we trained an individual RNN model using EEG data recorded during postprandial somnolence or sleep deprivation. All other analysis procedures remained the same to obtain the stimulus and task configuration network patterns during the drowsiness state. 

# 3 Statistical Analysis 

For the analysis of stimulus-driven network configurations, we compared the group-level seed-point connectivity against 0 at both the sub-network and single-region levels to determine which brain regions responded to the stimuli. To identify regions modulated by changes in stimulus characteristics, the group-level difference in seed-point connectivity between pairs of stimuli was also tested against 

0. For the task-driven analysis, the group-level β was compared against 0 to map the brain regions engaged by the tasks. All comparisons were conducted using t-tests, with statistical significance set at p < 0.05 following a Bonferroni correction. Finally, to compare functional connectivity within and outside the common network, as well as task performance with and without elimination of the common network, we conducted a one-way ANOVA followed by post-hoc two-sided paired t-tests (significance set at p < 0.05 , Bonferroni-corrected). 

# 4 Experimental Results 

4.1 Stimuli on the Auditory Cortex With Different Characteristics Configure Brain Connectivity Patterns 

Based on the RNN model with EEG dynamic constraints, we identified network configuration patterns under varying stimuli and tasks. We first examined stimulus-driven configuration under auditory input (bilateral transversetemporal regions). Three bilateral input types were analyzed: perfectly-correlated white noise ( r = 1 ), uncorrelated white noise ( r = 0 ), and periodic 40 Hz input (with 0◦ or 90 ◦ phase lag). Functional connectivity across brain regions revealed similar significant patterns across stimulus types (Figure 1(A)-(C), Upper-Left, t-test, p < 0.05 , Bonferroni correction). Seed-point connectivity mapping from the auditory cortex demonstrated extensive connections, primarily involving temporal and parietal regions (Figure 1(A)-(C), Bottom, t-test, p < 0.05 , Bonferroni correction). We next analyzed connectivity changes relative to stimulus characteristics: correlation ( r = 1 vs. 

r = 0 ) and periodicity ( r = 1 noise vs. 40 Hz). Correlation changes configured connectivity in the left limbic, right frontal, bilateral temporal, and parietal networks (Figure 1(D) left, middle, t-test, 

p < 0.05 , Bonferroni correction). Periodicity changes configured the left limbic, right occipital, right frontal, and right parietal networks (Figure 1(E) left, middle, t-test, p < 0.05 , Bonferroni correction). Modifying periodic frequency ( 40 Hz vs. 1 Hz, Figure S1(A)) or phase lag ( 0◦ vs. 

90 ◦, Figure S1(B)) did not significantly alter connectivity (t-test, Bonferroni correction). Pairwise analysis showed correlation changes primarily modulated cross-hemispheric connectivity originating from temporal regions (Figure 1(D) Right, paired t-test, p < 0.05 , Bonferroni correction), whereas periodicity changes modulated both cross- and intra-hemispheric connectivity (Figure 1(E) Right, paired t-test, p < 0.05 , Bonferroni correction). A “stimulus-driven common network”, responsive to both characteristic changes, was identified across frontal, temporal, and parietal regions (Figure 1(F) Left), modulating cross-hemispheric connections (Figure 1(G) Left). Thus, stimulus properties flexibly configure network connectivity across multiple regions. 74.2 Different Auditory Information Processing Tasks Configure Brain Activation Patterns 

Next, we investigated task-driven network configurations by adding a 68 × 1 readout layer to the RNN, generating a 1D signal for task requirements. Readout weights β, derived via least squares, represented regional activation. We evaluated two tasks: integration (summing bilateral inputs) and separation (subtracting bilateral inputs). Inputs comprised uncorrelated white noise and 40 Hz signals with 90 ◦ phase lag. Activation mapping revealed that both tasks engaged distributed networks, primarily involving the left temporal and parietal, and right frontal, temporal, and parietal networks (Figure 2(A)-(D), t-test, p < 0.05 , Bonferroni correction). These patterns were task-specific and invariant to stimulus type (Figure S2, t-test, Bonferroni correction). By merging these patterns, we identified a “task-driven common network” localized to the temporal and parietal regions (Figure 2(E), upper). 

4.3 The Stimulus-Task Common Network Under Auditory Input Is Coupled With the Hub of the Spontaneous Brain Connectivity Network, Forming a Triple-Configured Common Network 

We evaluated the coupling of this task-stimulus common network with spontaneous brain activity using Phase-Locking Value (PLV) (Figure 3(A)). Stimulus-driven connectivity under correlated white noise or 40 Hz input highly correlated with alpha ( 8 − 12 Hz) and beta ( 12 − 30 Hz) PLV (Corrected p < 1e − 10 , Figure 3(B)). Combining stimulus and task common networks yielded a “stimulus-task common network” encompassing the anterior parietal and temporal regions (postcentral, supramarginal, bankssts, inferiortemporal, and fusiform) (Figure 3(C)). Configuration within this network was diametrically opposed across different conditions. Correlational characteristic changes inversely correlated with periodic characteristic changes (Pearson R = −0.81 , p < 0.01 , Figure 3(D), Upper). Similarly, integration activation inversely correlated with separation activation (Pearson 

R = −0.68 , p = 0 .04 , Figure 3(D), Lower). In the alpha band, common network regions exhibited significantly higher degrees than the whole-brain average, indicating a hub role (Figure 3(E), Upper, paired t-test, p < 0.05 ); conversely, beta-band degree was lower (Figure 3(E), Lower, paired t-test, 

p < 0.05 ). Thus, this anterior parietal-temporal network undergoes triple configuration via external stimuli, tasks, and internal spontaneous activity. Furthermore, state changes (drowsiness via postprandial somnolence or sleep deprivation) modulated network dynamics. RNNs trained on drowsiness EEG revealed altered connectivity and activation, predominantly in the supramarginal region, compared to wakefulness (Figure S3, S4, paired t-test, 

p < 0.05 ). This corroborates the influence of internal brain states on network configuration. 

4.4 Eliminating the Common Network Disrupted Task Performance 

To assess functional significance, we eliminated the common network’s contribution by zeroing its corresponding readout weights during tasks. Performance was measured via output-target correlation. In both integration (Figure 4(A)) and separation (Figure 4(B)) tasks, eliminating the common network significantly reduced performance compared to normal and random-elimination conditions (One-way ANOVA, p < 0.001 ; post-hoc paired t-test, p < 0.001 , Bonferroni correction). This underscores the network’s critical role in information processing. 

4.5 The Triple-Configured Common Networks Under Auditory and Visual Stimuli Are Separated in the Parietal Region 

We then analyzed visual input at bilateral lateraloccipital regions. Seed-point connectivity changes due to correlation modulated the right temporal, and bilateral occipital and parietal networks (Fig-ure 5(A) left, middle, t-test, p < 0.05 , Bonferroni correction). Periodicity changes modulated the left temporal, occipital, and parietal networks (Figure 5(B) left, middle, t-test, p < 0.05 , Bonferroni cor-rection). Pairwise analysis showed both predominantly affected intra-parietal-occipital connectivity (Figure 5(A)-(B) Right, t-test, p < 0.05 , Bonferroni correction). A stimulus-driven common network was distributed across parietal and occipital regions (Figure 5(C) Left), modulating bilateral occipital connectivity (Figure 5(D) Left). 8Task-driven patterns under visual input (uncorrelated noise and 40 Hz with 90 ◦ phase lag) activated temporal, occipital, and parietal networks (Figure 5(E)-(H), t-test, p < 0.05 , Bonferroni correction). The task-driven common network localized to occipital and parietal regions (Figure 5(I), upper). Combining these yielded a visual stimulus-task common network (Figure 5(J)) in posterior parietal and occipital regions (inferiorparietal, cuneus, pericalcarine), anatomically distinct from the auditory common network. Dynamically, however, they were similar: stimulus correlation and periodicity changes were negatively correlated (Pearson R = −0.84 , p = 0 .04 , Figure 5(K), Upper), as were integration and separation activations (Pearson R = −0.81 , p = 0 .05 , Figure 5(K), Lower). The network exhibited significantly higher degree in alpha and beta bands, confirming spontaneous activity coupling (Figure 5(L), paired t-test, p < 0.05 ). Eliminating the common network significantly impaired performance in both tasks compared to controls (Figure 5(M), One-way ANOVA, p < 0.001 ;post-hoc paired t-test, p < 0.001 , Bonferroni correction). These findings demonstrate functional specialization within the parietal network: anterior regions process auditory information, while posterior regions process visual information. 

# 5 Discussion 

In this study, using an RNN model with source-localized EEG dynamic constraints, we separated and clarified triple brain network configurations modulated by external stimuli, tasks, and spontaneous brain activities. We identified the parietal regions as a common network serving different configuration types, distinguishing varying stimuli and task requirements through opposite configuration patterns. Furthermore, we demonstrated the functional specialization of the anterior and posterior parietal regions in network configurations under auditory and visual inputs, respectively. Brain network configurations driven by stimuli or tasks occur across multiple levels—from regional activation [ 19 , 2 , 1] and local interactions to global networks supporting complex cognition [ 33 ,18 , 25 ]. These patterns are also influenced by internal states like sleep [ 17 , 26 ]. By integrating exogenous and endogenous effects, we pinpointed the parietal region as a crucial hub bridging these configurations. Graph theoretical tools offer key insights into brain organization [ 10 , 47 , 37 ], highlighting optimal network properties for information processing, such as small-world [ 45 , 42 , 14 ] and scale-free struc-tures [ 15 , 29 ]. These theories underscore the importance of hub nodes for information transmission [39, 43]. Our findings confirm that parietal regions act as hub nodes within the spontaneous resting-state network, coupling with both stimulus- and task-driven configurations in complex environments. Previous work indicates functional specialization within the parietal cortex: the anterior part primarily handles sensory information [ 49 ], whereas the posterior part manages higher-order functions like spatial navigation [ 21 , 44 ], attention [ 50 , 9], working memory [ 7, 13 , 48 ], and learning [ 40 , 46 ]. We extend these insights by showing that the anterior parietal region aligns with auditory input configurations, while the posterior region aligns with visual input configurations. Finally, while our biologically-constrained RNN successfully isolated latent configuration factors, this study has limitations, including the spatial resolution constraints of source-localized EEG, the simplified nature of the RNN model, and the use of restricted artificial stimuli. Future work should explore these patterns using naturalistic inputs and higher-resolution neuroimaging [28, 32]. 

# References 

[1] Philippe Albouy, Avi Weiss, Sylvain Baillet, and Robert J Zatorre. Selective entrainment of theta oscillations in the dorsal stream causally enhances auditory working memory performance. 

Neuron , 94(1):193–206, 2017. [2] Philippe Albouy, Mélanie Rufiange, Isabelle Peretz, and Robert J Zatorre. Supramodality of neural entrainment: Rhythmic visual stimulation causally enhances auditory working memory performance. Science advances , 8(15):eabj9782, 2022. [3] Christian F Altmann, Marion Petton, Lutz Jäncke, and Jochen Kaiser. Effects of feature-selective attention on auditory pattern and location processing. Neuroimage , 42(1):69–79, 2008. 9[4] Andrea Avena-Koenigsberger, Bratislav Misic, and Olaf Sporns. Communication dynamics in complex brain networks. Nature reviews neuroscience , 19(1):17–33, 2018. [5] Sergul Aydore, Dimitrios Pantazis, and Richard M Leahy. A note on the phase locking value and its properties. Neuroimage , 74:231–244, 2013. [6] Danielle S Bassett, Nicholas F Wymbs, Mason A Porter, Peter J Mucha, Jean M Carlson, and Scott T Grafton. Dynamic reconfiguration of human brain networks during learning. 

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 108(18):7641–7646, 2011. [7] Marian E Berryhill, Jason Chein, and Ingrid R Olson. At the intersection of attention and mem-ory: the mechanistic role of the posterior parietal lobe in working memory. Neuropsychologia ,49(5):1306–1315, 2011. [8] Aurélie Bidet-Caulet, Leon Y Deouell, and Robert T Knight. Effects of selective attention on the electrophysiological representation of concurrent sounds in the human auditory cortex. 

Journal of Neuroscience , 27(34):9252–9261, 2007. [9] James W Bisley and Michael E Goldberg. Attention, intention, and priority in the parietal lobe. 

Annual review of neuroscience , 33:1–21, 2010. [10] Ed Bullmore and Olaf Sporns. Complex brain networks: graph theoretical analysis of structural and functional systems. Nature reviews neuroscience , 10(3):186–198, 2009. [11] Dante R Chialvo. Emergent complex neural dynamics. Nature physics , 6(10):744–750, 2010. [12] Arnaud Delorme and Scott Makeig. Eeglab: an open source toolbox for analysis of single-trial eeg dynamics including independent component analysis. Journal of neuroscience methods ,134(1):9–21, 2004. [13] Britta Hahn, Benjamin M Robinson, Stefan T Kaiser, Alex N Harvey, Valerie M Beck, Carlyle J Leonard, James M Gold, and Steven J Luck. Posterior parietal cortex dysfunction is central to working memory storage and broad cognitive deficits in schizophrenia. Journal of Neuroscience ,38(39):8378–8387, 2018. [14] Michael N Hallquist and Frank G Hillary. Graph theory approaches to functional network organization in brain disorders: A critique for a brave new small-world. Network neuroscience ,3(1):1–26, 2018. [15] Biyu J He. Scale-free brain activity: past, present, and future. Trends in cognitive sciences , 18 (9):480–487, 2014. [16] Margaret M Henderson, John T Serences, and Nuttida Rungratsameetaweemana. Dynamic categorization rules alter representations in human visual cortex. Nature Communications , 16 (1):3459, 2025. [17] Hyunwoo Jang, Minkyung Lee, Sel-In Kim, Hang-Kwon Kim, Seong-Wook Kim, Seung-Woo Lee, George A Mashour, and Uncheol Lee. Measuring the dynamic balance of integration and segregation underlying consciousness, anesthesia, and sleep in humans. Nature communications ,15(1):9164, 2024. [18] Koji Jimura and Todd S Braver. Age-related shifts in brain activity dynamics during task switching. Cerebral Cortex , 20(6):1420–1431, 2010. [19] Kirsten Jordan, Hans-Jochen Heinze, Kai Lutz, Martin Kanowski, and Lutz Jäncke. Cortical activations during the mental rotation of different visual objects. Neuroimage , 13(1):143–152, 2001. [20] Chang-Hao Kao, Po-Hsuan Chen, Fong-Hao Su, Yi-Tzu Wu, Philip Tseng, and Fa-Hsuan Lin. Functional brain network reconfiguration during learning in a dynamic environment. Nature communications , 11(1):1682, 2020. [21] Janina Klautke, Jean-Charles Pesnot-Lerousseau, Victor de Lafuente, Thomas Brochier, and Alexa Riehle. Dynamic spatial coding in parietal cortex mediates tactile-motor transformation. 

Nature Communications , 14(1):4532, 2023. 10 [22] Norman H Lam, Khiem Nguyen, Khoi D Le, Jina Chung, Charlie Nam, Soyun Choi, and Daesoo Kim. Prefrontal transthalamic uncertainty processing drives flexible switching. Nature ,637(8000):127–136, 2025. [23] Chenyang Li, Zeping Zhu, Yuhua Luo, Xiaobing Zhang, and Jin Li. Amygdala engages non-emotional multi-item working memory maintenance through amygdala-hippocampus interaction. 

bioRxiv , pages 2024–05, 2024. [24] Jin Li, Zeping Zhu, Yuhua Luo, Xiaobing Zhang, Chenyang Li, Dan Zhang, and Li Yao. Functional specialization and interaction in the amygdala-hippocampus circuit during working memory processing. Nature Communications , 14(1):2921, 2023. [25] Mike Li, Ben J Cruz, Joaquín Goñi, Ervin Shitiri, José Vizuete, Andri C Tziortzi, Olaf Sporns, Andreas A Ioannides, Shitij Kapur, and Meera Alle. Transitions in information processing dynamics at the whole-brain network level are driven by alterations in neural gain. PLoS computational biology , 15(10):e1006957, 2019. [26] Yun Li, Hui Liu, Ming Li, Weinan Li, Yajuan Yang, Tian-tian Li, Andrew E Hudson, Hong Yu, and Xiao-li Li. Comparison of nrem sleep and intravenous sedation through local information processing and whole brain network to explore the mechanism of general anesthesia. PloS one ,13(6):e0192358, 2018. [27] Timothy P Lillicrap and Adam Santoro. Backpropagation through time and the brain. Current opinion in neurobiology , 55:82–89, 2019. [28] Yue Liu and Xiao-Jing Wang. Flexible gating between subspaces in a neural network model of internally guided task switching. Nature communications , 16(1):6497, 2025. [29] Christopher W Lynn, Caroline M Holmes, and Stephanie E Palmer. Emergent scale-free networks. PNAS nexus , 3(3):pgad236, 2024. [30] Marcelo G Mattar, Richard F Betzel, and Danielle S Bassett. The flexible brain. Brain , 139(7): 2110–2112, 2016. [31] John D Medaglia, Fabio Pasqualetti, Roy H Hamilton, Sharon L Thompson-Schill, and Danielle S Bassett. Functional alignment with anatomical networks is associated with cognitive flexibility. Nature human behaviour , 2(2):156–164, 2018. [32] Mite Mijalkov, Ludvig Storm, Blanca Zufiria-Gerbolés, Kilian Abellaneda-Pérez, Karen Ritchie, Aida Carrié-I-Crespo, Laurence Annet, Bruno Dubois, Didier Dormont, Stéphane Epelbaum, et al. Computational memory capacity predicts aging and cognitive decline. Nature communi-cations , 16(1):2748, 2025. [33] Takumi Mitsuhashi, Koki Okita, Kenji Matsumoto, and Yoko Hoshi. Temporally and function-ally distinct large-scale brain network dynamics supporting task switching. Neuroimage , 257: 119126, 2022. [34] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. [35] Steven E Petersen and Olaf Sporns. Brain networks and cognitive architectures. Neuron , 88(1): 207–219, 2015. [36] Andrei V Sazonov, Marion Müller, Thomas König, and Inga Griskova-Bulanova. An investi-gation of the phase locking index for measuring of interdependency of cortical source signals recorded in the eeg. Biological cybernetics , 100(2):129–146, 2009. [37] Caio Seguin, Olaf Sporns, and Andrew Zalesky. Brain network communication: concepts, models and applications. Nature reviews neuroscience , 24(9):557–574, 2023. [38] James M Shine and Russell A Poldrack. Principles of dynamic network reconfiguration across diverse brain states. NeuroImage , 180:396–405, 2018. 11 [39] Cornelis Jan Stam. Hub overload and failure as a final common pathway in neurological brain network disorders. Network Neuroscience , pages 1–23, 2024. [40] Christopher Summerfield, Fabrice Luyckx, and Hannah Sheahan. Structure learning and the posterior parietal cortex. Progress in neurobiology , 184:101717, 2020. [41] François Tadel, Sylvain Baillet, John C Mosher, Dimitrios Pantazis, and Richard M Leahy. Brainstorm: A user-friendly application for meg/eeg analysis. Computational intelligence and neuroscience , 2011, 2011. [42] Taira Uehara, Takao Yamasaki, Toshiaki Okamoto, Takahiko Koike, Shinya Kan, Satoru Miyauchi, and Shozo Tobimatsu. Efficiency of a’small-world’brain network depends on consciousness level: a resting-state fmri study. Cerebral cortex , 24(6):1529–1539, 2014. [43] Martijn P Van den Heuvel and Olaf Sporns. Network hubs in the human brain. Trends in cognitive sciences , 17(12):683–696, 2013. [44] Marie-E Vericel, Thomas Michelet, Igor Kagan, and Suliann Ben Hamed. Organizing space through saccades and fixations between primate posterior parietal cortex and hippocampus. 

Nature Communications , 15(1):10448, 2024. [45] Duncan J Watts and Steven H Strogatz. Collective dynamics of ‘small-world’networks. nature ,393(6684):440–442, 1998. [46] Marlee Whybird, Melissa Johnson, and Ericka Johnson. The role of the posterior parietal cortex on cognition: an exploratory study. Brain Research , 1769:147452, 2021. [47] Florian Wüthrich, Werner Strik, Yosuke Morishima, Michael Kaess, Christoph M Michel, and Thomas J Müller. The neural signature of psychomotor disturbance in depression. Molecular psychiatry , 29(1):317–326, 2024. [48] Yaoda Xu. The human posterior parietal cortices orthogonalize the representation of different streams of information concurrently coded in visual working memory. PLoS biology , 22(6): e3002915, 2024. [49] Justin D Yao, Cheng Wang, Chandramouli Chandrasekaran, Michael N Shadlen, and William T Newsome. Transformation of acoustic information to sensory decision variables in the parietal cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 120(15):e2212120120, 2023. [50] Xuntao Yin, Tao Wang, and Antao Chen. Anatomical substrates of the alerting, orienting and executive control components of attention: focus on the posterior parietal lobe. PloS one , 7(11): e50590, 2012. 

# A Detailed Methods 

A.1 Participants, EEG Recording, and Preprocessing 

A total of 114 participants ( 60 males and 54 females, mean age ± SE = 25 .2 ± 2.4) were recruited for the experiment to record resting-state EEG during wakefulness; among these, 77 participants were also recorded during postprandial somnolence, and 6 participants were recorded after 24 hof sleep deprivation. All participants were right-handed, low-caffeine consumers, with normal or corrected-to-normal vision and without any neurological disorders. They were asked to get a good night’s sleep before the day of the experiment and to abstain from any psychotropic substances for one day before the experiment as well as during the entire experimental procedure. The experiment was approved by the ethics committee of the Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences. All participants provided informed consent. EEG data were recorded using 64 Ag/AgCl sintered ring electrodes (EasyCap) with BrainAmp DC amplifiers (Brain Products GmbH, Gilching, Germany). The position of electrodes was arranged according to the standard 10 − 20 system. AFz served as the ground, and the reference was placed on the tip of the nose. A vertical electrooculogram (EOG) was recorded to monitor eye movements and blinks. The EEG signals were amplified and digitized at a sampling rate of 5000 Hz ( 0.016 − 100 Hz 12 band-pass filtering), with impedances kept below 20 kΩ. Data acquisition was controlled through Brain Vision Recorder (version 1.03 , Brain Products GmbH, Gilching, Germany). For each subject and brain state, 4-minute eyes-closed and 4-minute eyes-open resting-state EEG were recorded. EEG preprocessing was performed in EEGLAB [ 12 ] (version 14 .1.1) installed in Matlab (MathWorks, Natick, MA). Raw EEG data were mapped to standard electrode locations and downsampled to 

250 Hz. The data were 0.05 − 45 Hz band-pass filtered offline followed by a notch filter at 50 Hz using a third-order, zero-phase, non-causal Butterworth filter. Artifacts from eye movements and blinks were removed using Independent Component Analysis (ICA). 

A.2 Source Localization 

We performed source localization to estimate underlying brain source signals from scalp-level EEG recordings using the Brainstorm toolbox [ 41 ]. A three-layer symmetric boundary element model (BEM) of the head was computed using OpenMEEG, and rotating dipoles with 3003 vertices on the cortical surface were selected. The Minimum Norm Estimation (MNE) approach, incorporating depth weighting and regularization, was applied to estimate the imaging kernel, mapping sensor-level EEG to source-level current source density. The three-dimensional current density time series for each vertex was reduced to a single dimension using Principal Component Analysis (PCA). Source-localized signals for Regions of Interest (ROIs) were extracted based on the Desikan-Killiany atlas (68 regions). ROI names and corresponding brain sub-networks are listed in Table S1. 

A.3 Triple Configuration Framework 

Specifically, the first type of configuration arises from the direct brain network response to external sensory inputs (e.g., auditory or visual) (Figure 6A, Left); the second originates from internal information reorganization driven by task requirements (Figure 6A, Middle); and the third stems from spontaneous brain activity, which is independent of external stimuli or tasks but intrinsically associated with the brain’s state (Figure 6A, Right). Notably, the parietal network participates simultaneously in configurations driven by external stimuli, tasks, and spontaneous activity. By comparing configuration patterns across different sensory modalities, this study further demonstrates the functional specialization of the anterior and posterior parietal networks in response to auditory and visual inputs, respectively. Collectively, these results elucidate the combined influence of endogenous and exogenous factors on brain network configurations, highlighting the parietal network’s role as a central hub. 

A.4 The triple-configured common network under multi-modal stimuli recruited the common network of the single-modal stimuli 

We then investigated network configuration under simultaneous auditory and visual input. Stimuli were redefined: aperiodic white noise perfectly correlated ( r = 1 ) or uncorrelated ( r = 0 ) be-tween auditory and visual cortices; and periodic 40 Hz signals with 0◦ or 90 ◦ phase lag between modalities. Stimulus-driven configuration (Figure 7(A)-(D)) revealed that correlation and periodicity changes, alongside the resultant common network, were distributed across the frontal, temporal, parietal, and occipital networks (Figure 7(A)-(C), t-test, p < 0.05 , Bonferroni correction). Pairwise analysis confirmed predominant involvement of intra-temporal, parietal, and occipital connections (Figure 7(A)-(B) Right, (D) Left, t-test, p < 0.05 , Bonferroni correction). Task-driven configuration demonstrated widespread regional participation in both integration and separation tasks (Figure 7(E)-(H), t-test, p < 0.05 , Bonferroni correction). The task-driven common network localized to temporal, parietal, and occipital regions (Figure 7(I), Upper). The combined auditory-visual stimulus-task common network (Figure 7(J)) integrated regions from both the auditory common network (supramarginal, bankssts, inferiortemporal) and visual common network (inferior-parietal, cuneus, pericalcarine). Dynamically, correlation configuration was negatively correlated with periodicity configuration (Pearson R = −0.77 , p < 0.01 , Figure 7(K), Upper), while integration and separation activations were positively correlated (Pearson R = 0 .59 , p = 0 .04 , Figure 7(K), Lower). Consistent with single-modal results, this multi-modal common network exhibited signifi-cantly higher degree in alpha and beta PLV networks (Figure 7(L)), indicating spontaneous activity coupling. Eliminating this common network significantly impaired performance in both integration (Figure 7(M), Upper, One-way ANOVA, p < 0.001 ; post-hoc paired t-test, p < 0.001 , Bonferroni 13 Figure 6: Study Pipeline. (A) Triple configuration framework of brain networks. Left: External stimulus-driven network configuration; Middle: External task-driven network configuration; Right: Internal spontaneous-activity network configuration. (B) RNN model training with input of source-localized EEG at time t to predict EEG at time t + 1 . Right panel shows the predicted EEG signal (blue line) and ground truth (red line) (C) Brain regions of interest for sensory input. The bilateral transverse temporal regions served as auditory inputs, and the bilateral lateral occipital regions served as visual inputs. (D) Stimulus setting. (E) Analysis procedure of stimulus-driven network configuration. (F) Analysis procedure of task-driven network configuration. (G) Analysis procedure of spontaneous-activity network configuration. correction) and separation tasks (Figure 7(M), Lower, One-way ANOVA, p < 0.001 ; post-hoc paired t-test, p < 0.001 , Bonferroni correction). Thus, multi-modal network configuration recruits single-modal hub networks. 

A.5 Local connectivity within the common network was strengthened under the corresponding external input 

We further evaluated connectivity within the common network (Internal), outside the common network (External), and across these boundaries (Across) under auditory (Figure 8(A)-(C)), visual (Figure 8(D)-(F)), and multi-modal (Figure 8(G)-(I)) input (One-way ANOVA, p < 0.001 ; post-hoc paired t-test, p < 0.05 , Bonferroni correction). Across all input types, internal connectivity patterns were consistent, characterized by significant anti-correlated connections. Spontaneous functional connectivity (alpha/beta PLV) was significantly higher inside the common networks compared to outside (Figure S4(A)-(F), One-way ANOVA, p < 0.001 ; post-hoc paired t-test, p < 0.05 , Bonferroni correction), implying inherent differentiation to support triple configuration. Specifically, alpha/beta PLV inside the auditory common network exceeded that of the visual and multi-modal common networks (Figure S4(G)-(H), One-way ANOVA, p < 0.001 ; post-hoc paired t-test, p < 0.05 ,Bonferroni correction). 14 Figure 7: Triple network configuration under auditory-visual cortex input. (A)-(D) Stimulus-driven configuration. (A) Network configuration by the change of correlated characteristic (Noise correlation 1 vs Noise correlation 0). Left: seed-point connectivity configuration of sub-networks; Middle: seed-point connectivity configuration mapping on the whole brain; Right: pairwise connectivity configuration of the whole brain. (B) Same as (A) by the change of periodic characteristic (Noise correlation 1 vs 40 Hz). (C) Left: Stimulus-driven common network by combining (A) and (B); Upper-right: Network only configured by the change of correlated characteristic; Lower-right: Network only configured by the change of periodic characteristic. (D) Same as (C) shown at the pairwise connectivity level. (E)-(I) Task-driven configuration. (E) Network configuration performing integration task under the input of white noise with correlation 0. Left: seed-point connectivity configuration of sub-networks; Right: seed-point connectivity configuration mapping on the whole brain. (F) Same as (E) under the input of 40Hz with phase lag 90°. (G) Network configuration performing separation task under the input of white noise with correlation 0. Left: seed-point connectivity configuration of sub-networks; Right: seed-point connectivity configuration mapping on the whole brain. (H) Same as (G) under the input of 40Hz with phase lag 90°. (I) Upper: Task-driven common network by combining (E) - (H); Lower-left: Network only configured by the integration task; Lower-right: Network only configured by the separation task. (J)-(M) Spontaneous-activity configuration. (J) Stimulus-task common network combining (C) and (I). (K) Correlation of common network configuration patterns. Upper: different types of stimulus input; Lower: different types of tasks. (L) Comparison between the degree of brain regions in the common network and the whole-brain averaged degree. Upper: alpha band; Lower: beta band. (M) Elimination experiment. Upper: integration task; Lower: separation task. *p <0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001 after Bonferroni correction. 15 Figure 8: Comparisons of stimulus-driven connectivity among three types: connectivity within the common network (Internal ), connectivity outside the common network (External) as well as connectivity across the internal regions and external regions of the common brain network (Across). (A)-(C) auditory cortex input; (D)-(F) visual cortex input; (G)-(I) auditory-visual cortex input. Left: input of noise correlation 1; Middle: input of noise correlation 0; Right: 40Hz. *p <0.05 after Bonferroni correction. 16