Title: Robust topological oscillators govern a tunable phase transition to synchronized circadian rhythms

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.13322v1

Published Time: Thu, 16 Jul 2026 00:16:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
# Robust topological oscillators govern a tunable phase transition to synchronized circadian rhythms 

Chongbin Zheng, 1, 2 Peter Thomas, 3 and Evelyn Tang 1, 2, ∗

> 1

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77005, USA 

> 2

Center for Theoretical Biological Physics, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77005, USA 

> 3

Department of Mathematics, Applied Mathematics and Statistics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA 

While synchronization has been well-studied in deterministic oscillators, most underlying oscilla-tors are stochastic in both natural and man-made systems. Yet, the effects of intrinsic stochasticity remain poorly understood. Here, we develop a new mechanism for synchronizing circadian KaiC molecules that have topologically protected cycles. We find a phase transition to synchronization that depends only on the single-oscillator coherence, across a range of molecular changes that de-termine this coherence. Examining both mesoscopic and macroscopic numbers relevant for cellular and in vitro conditions respectively, we find different scaling properties above and below the phase transition. Our results shed light on several existing experiments and further predict that exter-nal changes can be offset by compensatory changes that improve the single-oscillator coherence – demonstrating a tunable pathway between stochastic single oscillators and their robust collective rhythms. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Synchronized oscillations are ubiquitous in biological systems [1–6] and have been studied extensively in de-terministic models [7–13]. However, real biological os-cillators are subject to intrinsic stochastic noise, which drives phases apart to prevent synchronization. This mo-tivates the need for models that extend the mechanism of synchronization to stochastic oscillators [14–23]. No-tably, the onset of synchronization can emerge as a phase transition in the collective dynamics, with the canonical example of the Kuramoto model that couples determin-istic oscillators [7, 8]. In this framework, synchronization transition arises when the coupling strength exceeds a critical threshold. This framework has been extended to introduce external noise, e.g., in [24], but the effects of intrinsic stochastic noise remain largely unexplored. Another challenge in the study of synchronization is to move beyond the typical sinusoidal coupling used in the Kuramoto model, which does not directly relate to a physical mechanism. This has motivated the study of more physically grounded couplings by modeling detailed molecular interactions between oscillators [25–28]. A par-ticularly interesting system for probing synchronization mechanisms is the KaiABC circadian clock for cyanobac-teria. The circadian rhythm is governed by synchronized oscillations in the phosphorylation level of KaiC pro-teins [29, 30]. This system offers a powerful experimental testbed, since collective oscillations can be reconstituted 

in vitro from just three purified proteins [31]. This minimal circadian clock has motivated various de-terministic and stochastic models for the emergent oscil-lations. Although many models have reproduced syn-chronized KaiC oscillations, the role of the underlying  

> ∗Email: e.tang@rice.edu

individual molecules remain unclear. Most models de-scribe the population-level dynamics without discussing the role of individual molecules [32–38]. While some studies do study single KaiC proteins, the resulting be-haviors vary from noisy single-KaiC oscillations that de-phase quickly [39, 40] to persistent oscillations powered by intrinsic KaiC ATPase activity [41–43]. Furthermore, these single-molecule models do not connect to the global phase transition that governs synchronization and often involve complex reaction networks with many parame-ters. These features can make it difficult to understand and control the resulting collective behavior. Recently, a minimal model proposed that individual KaiC molecules oscillate in a coherent manner protected by a topological mechanism [44]. The tunability of this minimal model offers an opportunity to investigate the nature of the phase transition to synchronization and shed light on the supporting biophysical mechanisms. Experiments suggest that oscillations arise from negative feedback induced by sequestration of the protein KaiA, which slows down the phosphorylation of leading KaiC molecules [45, 46]. It is hence of interest to add this feedback mechanism to the topological model of KaiC molecules [44], thereby providing insight into the role that noisy oscillators play in the emergence of synchro-nization, which is of interest across many natural systems [28, 47–50]. In this paper, we add KaiA sequestration to topo-logically protected KaiC molecules [44] to find a novel phase transition to synchronization that depends only on the single-oscillator coherence rather than specific biochemical reaction rates. This dependence explains several experimental observations and generates testable predictions, based on how various experimental modi-fications change single-oscillator coherence. Examining both mesoscopic and macroscopic numbers of molecules, we find different scaling behaviors above and below the phase transition. This model further exhibits robust os-arXiv:2607.13322v1 [physics.bio-ph] 14 Jul 2026 2   

> FIG. 1. Single-molecule oscillations of KaiC phosphorylation level are synchronized through KaiA sequestration. (a) Individ-ual KaiC hexamers undergo ordered phosphorylation cycles. KaiA dimers (red) promote KaiC phosphorylation and become sequestered during dephosphorylation. ( x, y ) denotes the number of phosphorylated T and S sites, respectively. (b) Phospho-rylation dynamics of a single KaiC molecule can be captured by a topological model with a 2D state space. When ρ > 0, the system is in a topological phase, where edge currents give rise to autonomous single-molecule oscillations [44]. (c) A population of KaiC oscillators are synchronized through KaiA sequestration. When KaiA is sequestered, phosphorylation slows down for front runners (orange region), allowing the laggards (red region) to catch up.

cillatory dynamics and oscillation periods across chang-ing KaiA concentrations, which likely arise from the co-herent single-molecule dynamics. Our results reveal a new mechanism for synchronization in which collective oscillations depend on the stochastic dynamics of indi-vidual oscillators.  

> II. SYNCHRONIZATION OF TOPOLOGICALLY PROTECTED KAIC OSCILLATORS

We first characterize the dynamics of a single KaiC hexamer. Experiments show that individual KaiC hex-amers undergo ordered phosphorylation cycles at two sites named T and S [32, 51], as illustrated in Fig. 1(a). Following Ref. [44], we denote the phosphorylation level of the two sites by ( x, y ) and model the single-molecule dynamics by discrete stochastic transitions in a two-dimensional state space (Fig. 1(b), upper panel). Given phosphorylation level ( x, y ), letters (N, E, S, W) denote internal states that prime the KaiC hexamer for phos-phorylation or dephosphorylation. The system evolves 3

FIG. 2. Single-oscillator coherence governs a novel phase transition to synchronization and determines finite-N scaling behavior for collective oscillations. (a) In the deterministic limit N → ∞ , a phase transition to synchronization occurs when the single-oscillator coherence R1 ≳ 1.96 (dashed line). The dark blue region corresponds to a synchronous phase with sustained oscillations (e.g., in yellow), while the light blue region corresponds to an asynchronous phase with damped oscillations (in green). (b) Population-level coherence RN grows with N via power laws in the synchronous phase, but stops growing at large 

N in the asynchronous phase. Circles and triangles represent simulation results from the Gillespie algorithm and the diffusion approximation, respectively. (c) The population-level oscillation period T , illustrated on the top, shows smaller timing error at larger N . The period is normalized by T1, defined in Sec. III A. (d) Similar to (b), the timing error decreases with N via power laws in the synchronous phase but levels off at large N in the asynchronous phase. 

according to the master equation (aka. Kolmogorov’s for-ward equation [52]) dp

dt = Wsp, (1) where p ∈ RM 

> +

encodes the probability distribution over 

M = 196 possible states and Ws is the transition-rate matrix for a single KaiC molecule. The model dynamics is controlled by two parameters. First, the thermodynamic force μ quantifies the free en-ergy input from ATP hydrolysis (in units of kBT ) [53], which depends on the ATP/ADP ratio. The system obeys detailed balance at μ = 0, while increasing μ bi-ases each reaction in a preferred direction and drives di-rected motion in state space. Second, the topological pa-rameter ρ measures the relative rates between phospho-rylation/dephosphorylation (solid arrows in Fig. 1(b)) and “internal” transitions (dashed arrows) that prime these reactions, such as conformational change. Vary-ing ρ tunes the system between a topological phase (ρ > 0, where phosphorylation is faster) and a trivial phase ( ρ < 0) [44]. In the topological phase, protected edge states give rise to autonomous single-molecule oscil-lations (Fig. 1(b), lower panel). As ρ increases, the edge states become more robust: stochastic trajectories (dark green) are more likely to circulate around the state space 4boundary rather than wandering into the bulk. The pa-rameters μ and ρ specify the transition rates for KaiC together with a global scaling factor γ, as labeled in Fig. 1(b). To synchronize these KaiC oscillators, we couple their dynamics through sequestration of KaiA, a limited re-source that promotes KaiC phosphorylation [45, 46]. During dephosphorylation, KaiC hexamers sequester free KaiA dimers and limit their availability to other KaiC molecules [54], as illustrated in Fig. 1(c). This negative feedback slows down leading KaiC molecules in the or-ange region, so that the lagging ones in the red region can catch up. This leads to a narrower distribution of phosphorylation states across the population, which al-lows the oscillators to synchronize. In our model, free KaiA dimers promote phosphoryla-tion by speeding up the transitions with rates γSE (red dashed arrows in Fig. 1(b)). Based on experimental ev-idence [30, 55], we assume that each KaiC hexamer in-stantaneously sequesters six KaiA dimers after entering the red region of state space in Fig. 1(b), and releases them upon exit. Sequestration of free KaiA slows down the rate γSE for every KaiC molecule in the population. Specifically, we let γSE decrease linearly with the concen-tration of sequestered KaiA, denoted by cseq A . This effect modifies the transition-rate matrix Ws by an additional term cseq A W′, where W′ encodes changes to γSE (details in Appendix A). In the deterministic limit (KaiC copy number N → ∞ ), we obtain the rate equation dX

dt = [ Ws + cseq A (X)W′] X, (2) where X ∈ RM 

> +

denotes the fraction of KaiC molecules in each state. The strength of the coupling depends on the total KaiA concentration cA. We normalize cA = 1 to the standard experimental condition in vitro , where the numbers of KaiA dimers and KaiC hexamers are roughly equal [45, 51].   

> III. RESULTS A. Single-oscillator coherence determines a phase transition to synchronization

To characterize the quality of oscillations in our model, we examine the coherence RN for KaiC copy number 

N (also called the quality factor) [56, 57]. The quan-tity measures the number of reliable oscillation cycles before degradation by stochastic noise. For a single oscil-lator, the oscillation dynamics is governed by the slowest-decaying eigenvalue of the transition-rate matrix Ws, de-noted by −λR ± iλ I (λR, λ I > 0). The single-oscillator coherence R1 is given by R1 = λI/λ R (see details in Ap-pendix B). The real part of the eigenvalue specifies the decay time 1 /λ R of the oscillations, while the imaginary part provides a natural timescale given by T1 = 2 π/λ I,which is close to the period of a single KaiC oscillator [58]. The single-oscillator coherence R1 increases monoton-ically with both model parameters μ and ρ (lower left of Fig. 2(a)). We consider μ up to 5 kBT , based on low ATP consumption from experimental measurements of KaiC [59]. Meanwhile, we focus on the topological phase 

ρ > 0, and take ρ ∈ [0 , 5] to explore values both near the phase boundary and deep in the topological phase. We fix the KaiA concentration at the standard condi-tion cA = 1. Notably, the resulting oscillations remain robust, i.e., R1 > 1 [57], across a large range of parame-ter space. This observation contrasts with earlier models where individual KaiC molecules display low coherence [32–37, 39, 40]. Building on these robust oscillators, we examine the population-level coherence R∞ in the deterministic limit (N → ∞ ), relevant for in vitro experiments with large KaiC copy numbers. R∞ is extracted from oscillations in the percentage of phosphorylated KaiC monomers (% P-KaiC), described by the rate equation Eq. (2) (details in Appendix B). Interestingly, we find a phase transition that only depends on the single-oscillator coherence R1,not the underlying parameters μ and ρ that determine 

R1. The transition occurs at R1 ≳ 1.96 (dashed lines in Fig. 2(a)). Below the transition (the asynchronous phase), oscillations are damped and R∞ remains finite. Above the transition (the synchronous phase), oscilla-tions become sustained and R∞ diverges. The diverg-ing coherence describes oscillations that no longer de-cay: the decay time 1 /λ R diverges as N → ∞ , while 

λI remains roughly constant, indicating continued oscil-lations. These results are surprising as the transition depends only on an emergent property of individual os-cillators – their coherence – rather than specific biochem-ical reaction rates. The transition is a supercritical Hopf bifurcation, where the oscillation amplitude grows con-tinuously from zero via a square-root scaling law (see analysis in Appendix C).   

> B. Synchronous and asynchronous phases exhibit distinct scaling behavior with N

The above results connect single-molecule dynamics to collective oscillations in the limit N → ∞ . For oscilla-tions in vivo , however, only thousands of KaiC molecules are present [37, 61] and stochastic fluctuations remain significant. To characterize oscillations at finite N , we perform stochastic simulations and extract the coherence 

RN numerically (details in Appendix B). For N ≤ 500, we obtain RN using the Gillespie algorithm [62] (circles in Fig. 2(b)). At larger N , we instead use a diffusion approximation [50, 63, 64] for computational efficiency, shown by triangles in Fig. 2(b) (detailed derivations in Appendix D). RN displays different scaling behavior with 

N depending on the phase of the system. In the syn-chronous phase, RN grows with N via power laws and 5            

> FIG. 3. Experimental modifications shape population-level behavior by tuning single-molecule transitions rates. (a) In our model, KaiC mutants with longer population-level period Tcorrespond to a larger topological parameter ρ, which leads to larger oscillation amplitudes in % P-KaiC as experimentally observed [60]. The period is normalized by T1at ρ= 3. (b) Internal transitions from Fig. 1(b) can be modified by different experimental conditions. KaiB mutants show different binding rates (top), Mg 2+ concentration regulates A-loop conformational change from buried to exposed (left), KaiA acts catalytically to prime phosphorylation (bottom), while KaiC period mutants modulate CI ATPase activity to set the overall timescale of internal transitions (center).

is expected to diverge at N → ∞ . In the asynchronous phase, RN initially grows via power laws but eventually plateaus as N increases. While the two phases can be distinguished by different scaling behavior in RN , a quantity that is easier to mea-sure experimentally is the timing error. It quantifies the variability of the population-level period T and is defined as Std[ T ]/E[ T ] [37]. In our simulations, we extract T

by recording when % P-KaiC increases past a threshold, shown on the top of Fig. 2(c) (details in Appendix E). The resulting distributions at different N are shown in Fig. 2(c), where we take μ = ρ = 5. The timing error dis-plays similar scaling behavior as RN : it decreases with N

via power laws in the synchronous phase but eventually plateaus in the asynchronous phase (Fig. 2(d)). These different scaling behavior provide an experimentally ac-cessible way to detect the different phases at finite N . 

> C. The phase transition accounts for several existing experimental observations

This phase transition framework sheds light on several experimental observations. First, longer periods in our model are associated with larger oscillation amplitudes, as shown in Fig. 3(a). This is because longer periods correspond to a larger topological parameter ρ, which enhances the single-oscillator coherence R1. A higher 

R1 allows the population to oscillate more in phase with each other, yielding a larger oscillation amplitude (see details in Appendix F). Second, stronger non-equilibrium driving also produces larger oscillation amplitudes in our model, which can be similarly explained by a larger R1.Third, large changes to individual biochemical reaction rates (e.g., those in Fig. 3(b)) can disrupt sustained population-level oscillations. The oscillations are lost be-cause these changes degrade R1, which drive the system to the asynchronous phase. In each case above, changes in collective behavior directly follow from changes in R1,without requiring detailed simulations of the experimen-tal modifications as in other models. The first result, where a longer period leads to a larger amplitude, has been observed for several KaiC mutants with different periods [60]. Our model predicts this be-cause the different mutants correspond to different topo-logical parameter ρ and thus different R1. The longer-period mutants have lower CI ATPase activity, which slows down the internal transitions shown in Fig. 3(b) [59, 65, 66]. Since the internal transition rates scale as 1/e ρ, longer periods lead to larger ρ and larger R1, which produces a larger amplitude. The amplitude grows more rapidly at shorter periods (Fig. 3(a)), which also agrees with experimental observations [60]. Similar analysis also explains the second result of larger amplitudes at stronger non-equilibrium driving, observed in experiments with different ATP/ADP ratios [34]. In our model, a higher ATP/ADP ratio sets a stronger thermodynamic force μ,which also increases R1 and the amplitude. Experiments have further demonstrated the third re-sult, where sustained oscillations are lost under disrup-tive changes such as extreme Mg 2+ levels [67] or KaiB mutants [68, 69]. These modifications act on individual reaction rates that have been mapped to specific transi-tions in our model [44], as illustrated in Fig. 3(b). KaiB binding to KaiC corresponds to the ( x, y )N → (x, y )W

transition, which becomes faster for the KaiB mutants in [68, 69]. Mg 2+ ions enable conformational changes of KaiC A-loops from exposed (blue circles) to buried (pur-6ple squares) [67], which promotes the ( x, y )W → (x, y )S

transition. Large changes to these rates degrade R1 be-low the critical threshold, pushing the system into the asynchronous phase. Together, these three results illus-trate the strength of our framework: the effects of dis-parate experimental conditions can be understood in a unified way by analyzing changes to R1, which also pro-vides a direct connection between single-molecule dynam-ics and collective behavior. Because the phase transition only depends on R1, we further predict that disruptions to synchronized oscilla-tions can be offset by other changes that restore R1 above the critical threshold. For example, sustained oscillations disrupted by KaiB mutants or low Mg 2+ concentration may be recovered by increasing the ATP/ADP ratio or using longer-period KaiC mutants. Notably, these restor-ing changes do not directly reverse the disrupted pro-cesses – adding ATP does not slow down KaiB binding, and KaiC mutants do not restore Mg 2+ -dependent con-formational changes. Instead, they raise R1 back above the critical value by acting on unrelated biochemical pro-cesses. Such compensatory effects are a distinctive pre-diction of our model. In previous models [32–43], the disruptions above would affect key mechanistic steps that enable population-level oscillations, which are unlikely to be rescued by changes to unrelated rates.  

> D. Synchronized KaiC oscillations and their period remain robust under changing KaiA concentration

The coherent single-molecule dynamics further lead to robust population-level oscillations across different KaiA concentration cA, even though cA changes the coupling between KaiC oscillators. In our model, sustained os-cillations persist over a wide range of cA (see Fig. 4(a)), consistent with experimental observations [30, 45]. When 

cA is too high, oscillations are lost via a supercritical Hopf bifurcation. When cA is too low, the system in-stead undergoes a subcritical Hopf bifurcation followed by a saddle-node bifurcation of limit cycles, where the oscillation amplitude drops to zero abruptly (details in Appendix C). The range of cA supporting sustained oscillations ex-pands with higher single-oscillator coherence, as illus-trated in Fig. 4(b) for increasing thermodynamic force 

μ. The hatched region indicates the estimated param-eter range for past experiments where sustained KaiC oscillations have been observed [30, 34, 45, 59] (see Ap-pendix G). As a result, KaiC synchronization becomes more robust to changing coupling strength as single-molecule oscillations improve. We thus predict that disruptions in population-level oscillations from chang-ing cA can be offset by increasing the ATP/ADP ratio that raises μ (white arrows in Fig. 4(b)). This extends the compensatory mechanism in Sec. III C: increased single-molecule coherence can compensate for disruptive changes in coupling strength as well as in single-molecule transition rates. Within the synchronous phase, our model yields a ro-bust oscillation period T under changing cA, as observed by in vitro experiments [30, 70] (red and yellow stars in Fig. 4(c)). Blue circles show our model results in the deterministic limit, with μ = 4 , ρ = 3 and T normal-ized to 22 hours at cA = 1. The stability of the period arises from coherent single-molecule oscillations, whose intrinsic period T1 anchors the timescale for population-level oscillations. Even though varying cA can modulate the phosphorylation and sequestration dynamics, it only perturbs T away from this baseline. In contrast, no such timescale can be defined in pre-vious models with incoherent single-KaiC oscillations [39, 40]. The period instead emerges from KaiA-mediated coupling, and depends more strongly on cA as seen in van Zon et al. [39] (green squares in Fig. 4(c)). To offset the rapid decrease in T , Mori et al. [36] incorporate a longer sequestration time for larger cA. This yields a more ro-bust period but an increasing trend at large cA (pur-ple squares). These difficulties highlight the importance of coherent single-molecule oscillations, which provide a natural mechanism for stabilizing the period. Coherent single-molecule oscillations further con-tribute to a robust timing error under changing cA. In the synchronous phase (filled circles in Fig. 4(d)), the timing error remains low over a wide range of cA. It only starts to increase at lower cA, where the oscillation amplitude shrinks and becomes comparable to stochastic fluctuations. This robustness likely arises from coherent single-molecule dynamics, as parameters with higher R1

(dark blue) maintain low timing error over a wider range of cA. In the asynchronous phase (open circles), however, the timing error increases rapidly as cA deviates from the standard condition cA = 1.  

> IV. DISCUSSION

In this study, we have developed a population-level model for synchronized oscillations of KaiC phosphory-lation. Our model identifies a phase transition to syn-chronization among coupled stochastic KaiC oscillators, which has not been analyzed in previous models of KaiC [32–43]. Interestingly, the transition only depends on the single-oscillator coherence R1, providing a direct con-nection between single-molecule stochastic dynamics and population-level oscillations. It further sheds light on the effects of diverse experimental modifications, which can be understood through how they modify a single emer-gent property, R1, without detailed population-level sim-ulations that account for each modification. We further characterize the nature of the phase transition: it is gen-erally a supercritical Hopf bifurcation, but shows up as a subcritical Hopf bifurcation along with a saddle-node bifurcation of limit cycles at low KaiA concentration. Our model further yields several distinctive predic-tions that can be tested experimentally. Because the 7                      

> FIG. 4. KaiC oscillations and collective period are robust under changing KaiA concentration cA. (a) Sustained oscillations in % P-KaiC persist over a wide range of cA.Different colors correspond to different cAshown in (b). (b) The range of cA
> supporting sustained oscillations expands with the thermodynamic force μ. Oscillations are lost when cAis too high or too low, but can be restored by increasing μ(white arrows). The hatched area indicate the parameter range for which sustained KaiC oscillations are observed experimentally [30, 34, 45, 59]. (c) The oscillation period in our model (blue circles) is robust under changing cA, consistent with experimental data (stars) [30, 70]. In comparison, the period from other models (squares) either shows a stronger dependence on cA[39] (green) or increases at large cAinstead [36] (purple). (d) The timing error remains low over a broad range of cAin the synchronous phase (filled circles), and increases rapidly when cAdeviates from one in the asynchronous phase (open circles).

phase transition only depends on single-oscillator coher-ence rather than specific reaction rates, we predict that experimental modifications that disrupt population-level oscillations may be compensated by other modifications that increase single-oscillator coherence. For example, damped oscillations resulting from KaiB mutants or low Mg 2+ levels may be restored by increasing the ATP/ADP ratio or using KaiC mutants with longer periods. Similar compensatory changes may also restore sustained oscil-lations for extreme levels of KaiA concentration, which disrupt the coupling between KaiC molecules. Our model also predicts that the timing error for synchronized os-cillations remains robust under changing KaiA concen-tration, provided that the oscillation amplitude is large compared to stochastic fluctuations. Finally, when KaiA concentration is reduced, we predict that the oscillation amplitude drops discontinuously to zero due to a sub-critical Hopf bifurcation (see Sec. III D). This contrasts with a previous model from van Zon et al. [39], where amplitudes are expected to change continuously through a supercritical Hopf bifurcation. Overall, our results demonstrate how robust collec-tive oscillations can arise from coherent molecular oscil-lators, even under limited coupling or changing exter-nal conditions. By identifying single-oscillator coherence as a key parameter governing synchronization, we show that mechanisms that maintain molecular-scale coher-ence (e.g., topological protection [44]) can play an im-portant role in sustaining population-level oscillations. Beyond the KaiABC system, modifying single-molecule properties may provide a general strategy for designing and controlling reliable biochemical oscillators. More 8broadly, the methods developed here provide a frame-work for connecting single-molecule stochastic dynamics to emergent collective behavior, which may provide in-sight on robust dynamics in other stochastic biological systems, such as neuronal [71] or metabolic [3, 72] net-works. 

> ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

CZ and ET acknowledge support from the NSF Cen-ter for Theoretical Biological Physics (PHY2019745), the NSF CAREER Award (DMR-2238667), and the CZI Theory Institute Without Walls. PT acknowledges sup-port by NSF grant DMS-2052109 and the Oberlin College Department of Mathematics. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and the Supplementary Materials.  

> Appendix A THE RATE EQUATION

In this section, we provide a more detailed account of the deterministic rate equation Eq. (2), which governs the dynamics of a coupled population of KaiC oscillators.Let the population vector X(t) = ( X1(t), X 2(t), ..., X M (t)) ⊺

denote the fraction of molecules in each of the M states. For an infinite population of independent KaiC oscilla-tors, X(t) evolves according to dX

dt = WsX, (3) where Ws 

> ij

encodes the transition rate from state j to i.This equation is analogous to the master equation for a single KaiC molecule (Eq. (1) in the main text): dp

dt = Wsp, (4) where p(t) is the probability distribution over different states. In the deterministic limit N → ∞ , fluctuations are averaged out and the population vector X(t) evolves in the same way as the probability distribution p(t). We next incorporate the effects of KaiA sequestration, which modifies the KaiA-promoted transition rate γSE in 

Ws. Let cfree A , cseq A , and cA denote the free, sequestered, and total KaiA concentration, respectively. The total KaiA concentration cA is kept fixed, while sequestration reduces the amount of free KaiA and thereby lowers γSE .We model this effect by letting γSE vary linearly with 

cfree A , which in turn depends on the population vector 

X(t): 

γSE (X) = cfree A (X)( γ/e ρ − γ/e μ+ρ) + γ/e μ+ρ

= [ cA − cseq A (X)] ( γ/e ρ − γ/e μ+ρ) + γ/e μ+ρ.

(5) The rate is defined such that γSE = γ/e ρ at cfree A = 1 and 

γSE = γ/e μ+ρ (same as its reverse rate) when all KaiA is sequestered at cfree A = 0. We normalize the total KaiA concentration so that cA = 1 corresponds to the standard condition for in vitro experiments [45, 51]. At the standard condition, the KaiA dimer concentra-tion approximately equals the KaiC hexamer concentra-tion [45, 51]. Here we set them to be exactly equal, so that cA can be interpreted as the total KaiA concentra-tion relative to that of KaiC. Thus cseq A can be obtained from the distribution of KaiC via 

cseq A (X) = min( v⊺

> A

X, c A), (6) where the vector vA encodes the number of sequestered KaiA dimers in each KaiC state. We take vA,i = 6 for states in the red region of Fig. 1(b) and vA,i = 0 other-wise. At finite KaiC copy number N , the concentration 

cA translates to a discrete count of KaiA dimers: a pop-ulation of N KaiC hexamers corresponds to cAN KaiA dimers. Based on Eq. (5), the effects of sequestration can be expressed compactly as an additional coupling term 

cseq A (X)W′ that modifies the single-molecule transition matrix Ws. We thus obtain the deterministic rate equa-tion for the coupled population: dX

dt = [ Ws + cseq A (X)W′] X. (7) The matrix W′ encodes changes to the transition rate 

γSE . Specifically, W′ 

> ij

= −(γ/e ρ − γ/e μ+ρ) for the tran-sitions ( x, y )S → (x, y )E and W′ 

> ij

= 0 otherwise. We numerically solve Eq. (7) to obtain the popula-tion dynamics and the coherence in Fig. 2(a) of the main text. The solution X(t) gives the distribution of KaiC molecules across different possible states. To convert 

X(t) to the fraction of phosphorylated monomers, or % P-KaiC for short (denoted by f (t)), we compute the in-ner product f (t) = f ⊺X(t) at each time step, where the vector f = ( f1, f 2, ..., f n)⊺ denotes the % P-KaiC corre-sponding to each state. For a state i with phosphoryla-tion level ( x, y ), we take fi = 16 (x + y − xy  

> 6

). This expres-sion corresponds to the expected fraction of monomers with at least one phosphorylated site, assuming that the 

x phosphorylated T sites and y phosphorylated S sites are randomly distributed among the six monomers.  

> Appendix B COHERENCE

In this section, we define coherence and describe how we extract it from % P-KaiC oscillations. We begin with a single KaiC molecule and then extend the definition to a population. The single-molecule dynamics is described by the master equation Eq. (4). It has the general so-lution p(t) = exp ( Wst) p(0), which can be decomposed into eigenmodes of Ws. At long times, the dynamics is dominated by the slowest-decaying eigenvalue, i.e., the 9eigenvalue with the least negative real part [73]. For KaiC oscillators, the eigenvalue appears as a complex conjugate pair, which we denote by λ1 = −λR ± iλ I

(λR, λ I ≥ 0). The imaginary part λI sets the oscilla-tion period for the probability distribution p(t), which provides a natural timescale T1 = 2 π/λ I for the sys-tem dynamics. We use the period T1 to normalize the timescale of population-level oscillations in Fig. 2(c) and Fig. 4(a). Using other definitions of the period (e.g. the mean–return–time period [74]) do not qualitatively affect our conclusions. The slowest-decaying eigenvalue λ1 also governs oscil-lations of % P-KaiC, averaged over different stochastic trajectories. Using the vector f defined in Appendix A, the expectation value of % P-KaiC follows 

⟨f (t)⟩ = f ⊺p(t) = f ⊺exp ( Wst) p(0) , (8) which exhibits sinusoidal oscillations with an exponen-tially decaying envelope. The oscillation period is again given by 2π/λ I, while the exponential envelope has a characteristic decay time 1 /λ R [56, 73]. Following Ref. [56], we thus define the single-oscillator coherence (also called the oscillation’s quality factor [57]) by 

R1 = λI

λR

, (9) which corresponds to the number of coherent oscillations in % P-KaiC before relexation to the steady state. From this definition, we obtain R1 in the lower left of Fig. 2(a) by computing the eigenvalues of Ws across different μ

and ρ.For a coupled population of KaiC molecules, % P-KaiC may also go through damped oscillations similar to the single-molecule case. However, the eigenvalue λ1 can-not be easily obtained, as the transitions matrix changes over time due to KaiA sequestration. We thus extract the population-level coherence from the time trace of % P-KaiC oscillations. In the deterministic limit N → ∞ ,we numerically solve the rate equation for the popula-tion (Eq. (7)), where all molecules are initialized in the state (0 , 0) S. We then identify the peaks of the oscilla-tions and fit them to a decaying exponential of the form 

β1 + β2e−β3t (β1, β 2, β 3 ∈ R), using the nlinfit function in MATLAB. The first two peaks are discarded to elim-inate the effects of transient behavior from the initial condition. We also compute the average time interval between successive peaks, denoted by ¯T . The coherence is then given by 

R∞ = 2πβ3 ¯T , (10) which is shown on the upper right of Fig. 2(a). When the oscillations do not decay, the coherence is considered to diverge, i.e., R∞ → ∞ .For finite N , because % P-KaiC oscillations become noisy, we generate at least 1000 stochastic trajectories and study their average at each N . Again, all oscillators are initialized at state (0 , 0) S for each simulation. The averaged trajectories are smoothed using the Savitsky-Golay filter with third-order polynomial fitting and a window size of 41 time points. We then extract the peaks from the smoothed trajectories, obtain β3 and ¯T as above, and calculate RN using Eq. (10). The same pro-cedure is performed for both Gillespie simulations and the diffusion approximation.  

> Appendix C PHASE TRANSITION TO SYNCHRONIZATION

In this section, we analyze the bifurcations in Fig. 2(a) and Fig. 4(b) that result in the transition to synchro-nization. To identify the types of bifurcations involved, we examine the eigenvalues of the Jacobian at the steady state Xss of Eq. (7). First, we solve for Xss numerically by setting dX 

> dt

= 0. Linearizing the dynamics around the steady state gives the Jacobian: 

J = Ws + ( v⊺ 

> A

Xss )W′ + W′(Xss v⊺

> A

). (11) This Jacobian always has a zero eigenvalue, because each of its columns sums to 0. This mode reflects conservation of probability and does not affect the oscillatory dynam-ics, so we exclude it from further analysis. Among the remaining modes, the slowest decaying ones appear as a complex conjugate pair. As the system parameters ( μ, ρ ,or cA) are tuned to the synchronous phase, the pair of eigenvalues moves across the imaginary axis, where their real parts become positive. As a result, the fixed point 

Xss becomes unstable and a stable limit cycle emerges, indicating a Hopf bifurcation that marks the onset of synchronous oscillations. To further determine the nature of the Hopf bifur-cation, we examine how the oscillation amplitude of % P-KaiC behaves near the phase boundary. We first fo-cus on the transition at the standard KaiA concentration 

cA = 1, shown on the upper right of Fig. 2(a). As either 

μ or ρ is tuned, the amplitude grows continuously from zero and scales as the square root of the distance to the phase boundary (see Fig. 5(a) and Fig. 5(b)), which is characteristic of a supercritical Hopf bifurcation [75]. Next, we examine the two phase transitions in Fig. 4(b) at high or low cA, when μ and ρ are fixed. At high cA,the amplitude similarly follows a square root dependence (see Fig. 5(c)), which indicates a supercritical Hopf bi-furcation. In contrast, the transition at low cA is qual-itatively different (Fig. 5(d)). As cA decreases from the synchronous phase, the unstable fixed point Xss becomes stable while the stable limit cycle persists. This sug-gests that the system undergoes a subcritical Hopf bi-furcation, where the unstable fixed point splits into a stable fixed point and an unstable limit cycle. In this bistable regime, trajectories either approach the stable fixed point or the stable limit cycle depending on their initial conditions, which results in two branches for the amplitude (diamonds in Fig. 5(d)). When cA is decreased 10 

FIG. 5. Oscillation amplitude near phase boundaries reveal qualitatively different bifurcations. (a) At the standard KaiA concentration cA = 1 and fixed ρ, the oscillation amplitude of % P-KaiC grows as √μ − μc when the thermodynamic force 

μ exceeds some critical value μc, a hallmark of a supercritical Hopf bifurcation. (b) The same square root scaling √ρ − ρc is observed when tuning the topological parameter ρ at cA = 1 and fixed μ. (c) At high cA and fixed ( μ, ρ ), the amplitude decreases as √cA,c − cA, indicating another supercritical Hopf bifurcation. (d) At low cA, the transition is qualitatively different. The system first enters a bistable regime with a stable limit cycle (nonzero amplitude) and a coexisting stable fixed point (zero amplitude), shown by the two branches of diamonds. As cA decreases further, the stable limit cycle annihilates with an unstable limit cycle in a saddle–node bifurcation of limit cycles, and only the stable fixed point remains. In all panels, blue markers denote numerical results from our model while red curves in panels (a)-(c) show square-root fits. 

further, the stable and unstable limit cycles annihilate in a saddle–node bifurcation of limit cycles, leaving only the stable fixed point Xss . Beyond this point, the system no longer supports sustained oscillations, and trajectories only undergo damped oscillations toward Xss .

Appendix D THE DIFFUSION APPROXIMATION 

In this section, we include a derivation of the diffusion approximation, which converts a rate equation (Eq. (7)) to a Langevin equation for more efficient simulations. Our derivation is similar to the approach outlined in Ref. [64]. We first set up the notation needed for the derivation. We consider a population of N identical KaiC oscillators, each with M possible states ( M = 196). The distribution of the population is specified by the population vector 

X(t) = 1 

> N

(N1(t), ..., N M (t)) ⊺, where Ni(t) is the number of molecules at state i. Transitions between system states are specified by the matrix (see Eq. (7)) 

W(X) = Ws + cseq A (X)W′, (12) where Wij (X) denotes the transition rate from state j

to i. For notational simplicity, we suppress the explicit 

X-dependence in what follows. To enumerate all possible reactions, we introduce the M × K stoichiometric matrix 

S, where each column corresponds to one of the K possi-ble reactions. For the transition j → i, the corresponding 11 

k-th column is given by 

Smk =



+1 , m = i

−1, m = j

0, m̸ = i, m ̸ = j, (13) which encodes the stoichiometric coefficient for the reac-tion. The key idea of the diffusion approximation is to re-place the Poisson processes describing biochemical reac-tions by Gaussian processes. Consider the number of reactions that occur within a short time interval d t. For the transition j → i, the number of KaiC that undergo the transition follows a Poisson distribution with mean 

μij (t) = Wij Nj (t) d t = Wij Xj (t)N dt + o(d t). (14) Accounting for all possible reactions in the system, the total change of Ni(t) over the interval d t is dNi = X 

> j̸=i

Poisson[ μij (t)] − X 

> j̸=i

Poisson[ μji (t)] (15) When N is sufficiently large so that μij (t) ≫ 1, the Poisson distributions may be approximated by Gaussian distributions with the same mean and variance μij (t). Under this approximation, we can decompose the Gaus-sian increments into drift and diffusion terms, which yields a stochastic differential equation in the Itˆ o sense: dNi =

X 

> j̸=i

Wij Xj (t) − X 

> j̸=i

Wji Xi(t)

 N dt

+ X 

> j̸=i

q

Wij Xj (t)N dWij (t)

− X 

> j̸=i

q

Wji Xi(t)N dWji (t), (16) Here, d Wij (t) are increments from independent Wiener processes. The stochastic differential equation is equiva-lent to the following Langevin equation: dXi

dt = X 

> j̸=i

Wij Xj (t) − X 

> j̸=i

Wji Xi(t)+ 1

√N

X 

> j̸=i

q

Wij Xj (t) ξij 

− 1

√N

X 

> j̸=i

q

Wji Xi(t) ξji , (17) where ξij denote independent Gaussian white noises. Eq. (17) can be rewritten more compactly using the sto-ichiometric matrix. Let jk and ik denote the start and final state for the reaction corresponding to the k-th col-umn of the stoichiometric matrix S. We then have dXi

dt = Wij Xj (t) + 1

√N

X

> k

Sik 

q

Wik jk Xjk (t) ξk. (18) Finally, we can write down the Langevin equation in vec-tor form: dX

dt = [ Ws + f (X)W′] X + 1

√N G(X)ξ(t), (19) where G(X) is an M × K matrix given by 

Gik (X) = Sik 

q

Wik jk (X)Xjk (t). (20) In principle, converting the rate equation (Eq. (7)) to the Langevin equation (Eq. (19)) requires that the mean 

μij (t) = Wij Xj (t)N dt ≫ 1 for every transition j → i

at any time t. Choosing d t = 10 −3T1, this condition de-mands very large populations on the order of N ∼ 10 7

for transitions with small rates (e.g., Wij = γ/e μ+ρ). In practice, however, we find that much smaller values suffice: N = 500 already leads to good agreement with Gillespie simulations as shown by Fig. 2(b) and Fig. 2(d). This likely reflects that reactions with small fluxes (where the approximation is the least precise) have minimal im-pact on the overall dynamics, allowing the diffusion ap-proximation to be accurate at much smaller N .One caveat of the approximation is that the Gaussian noise can drive the fractions Xi(t) to negative values, which is unphysical. Several schemes have been proposed to address this issue [50, 64, 76, 77]: (1) a free bound-ary condition where Xi(t) is allowed to be negative; (2) a reflecting boundary condition where negative Xi(t) is immediately reflected to |Xi(t)|; and (3) an absorbing boundary condition where negative values are set to 0. To compare their performance, we generated 500 trajec-tories of % P-KaiC from each method and compared their average dynamics with those from Gillespie simulations, which we treat as the ground truth. The free boundary condition yields the best agreement, provided that we calculate the square root in Eq. (20) using the absolute value of the argument as done in Refs. [50, 64]. We there-fore adopt the free boundary condition for all simulations in the main text involving the diffusion approximation, noting that negative excursions of Xi(t) have small am-plitudes and do not affect the dynamics noticeably.  

> Appendix E EXTRACTING THE TIMING ERROR

To obtain the timing error, we extract the time be-tween successive upward crossings of a fixed % P–KaiC threshold, as illustrated on the top of Fig. 2(c). This method contrasts with Ref. [37], which measures the os-cillation period T using peak-to-peak intervals. We use threshold crossings because it provides a more accurate estimate of the period: the uncertainty in determining the crossing time is inversely proportional to the deriva-tive of % P-KaiC at the threshold [78]. Since the deriva-tive is small near the peaks, small fluctuations in % P-KaiC produce much more jitters in peak-to-peak intervals compared to a threshold where the derivative is large. 12 To study the scaling behavior of the timing error, we generate at least 1000 trajectories at each N . Each tra-jectory is smoothed using the Savitsky-Golay filter, again using third-order polynomial fitting and a window size of 61 time points. The period T is then extracted from the points at which the smoothed trajectories increase past the threshold % P-KaiC level. Note that we smooth out individual trajectories here and not the averaged trajec-tory, in contrast to Appendix B. The choice of threshold depends on the parameter regime. For Fig. 2(d) where 

cA = 1, we choose a threshold of 0.62 for all N and (μ, ρ ), the level at which % P-KaiC changes rapidly. In contrast, for Fig. 4(d), the mean level of % P-KaiC oscil-lations shifts significantly with KaiA concentration. We thus select a separate threshold for each combination of (μ, ρ, c A) by minimizing the resulting timing error. In practice, this optimal threshold lies around the midpoint between the peak and the trough of the average oscilla-tion profile, where spurious crossings from random fluctu-ations (which increases timing error) are the least likely. After extracting the crossing times and therefore the pe-riods T , the timing error is computed from the coefficient of variation for T , i.e., Std[ T ]/E[ T ].          

> FIG. 6. Oscillation amplitude increases with both the thermo-dynamic force μand topological parameter ρ. The amplitude is set by the single-oscillator coherence R1: parameters ( μ, ρ )with the same R1yield roughly the same amplitude.
> Appendix F SINGLE-OSCILLATOR COHERENCE R1AND AMPLITUDE

In our model, larger single-oscillator coherence R1 is associated with a larger amplitude for population-level % P-KaiC oscillations. This effect is shown in Fig. 6: the amplitude increases with both the thermodynamic force 

μ and the topological parameter ρ, and its contour lines closely follow that of R1 in Fig. 2(a). This structure indicates that parameters ( μ, ρ ) with the same R1 gives rise to similar amplitudes. This connection arises because more coherent oscilla-tions on the single-molecule level allow the population to be more synchronized: individual oscillators are less sus-ceptible to stochastic fluctuations that spread out their phosphorylation states, leading to a narrower distribu-tion throughout the oscillation cycle. In our model, indi-vidual oscillators typically traverse the boundary of the state space, due to topological protection, meaning that they become fully phosphorylated or dephosphorylated within each cycle. As a result, the narrower distribu-tion translates into higher peaks (more molecules at full phosphorylation) and lower troughs (more molecules at full dephosphorylation), and hence a larger amplitude. This connection between R1 and amplitude explains why longer oscillation periods (increasing ρ) and stronger non-equilibrium driving (increasing μ) are associated with a larger oscillation amplitude in our model.    

> Appendix G ESTIMATING THE THERMODYNAMIC FORCE μFROM EXPERIMENTS

In this section, we give an estimate of the thermody-namic force μ in our model based on experimentally mea-sured ATP consumption rates for KaiC. This estimate al-lows us to identify the experimentally relevant parameter regime as shown in Fig. 4(b). In our model, μ is defined as the log ratio of forward to reverse rates for each pair of transitions. Based on non-equilibrium thermodynamics, this quantity is set by the free energy input from ATP hydrolysis, which maintains the KaiABC circadian oscillations [53]. For simplicity, we assume the same μ for each pair of reactions in the state space. 

In vitro experiments have found that each KaiC monomer consumes around 12–15 ATP molecules per day (i.e., per oscillation cycle) [30, 59]. Assuming that hydrol-ysis of each ATP molecule releases 20 kBT of free energy [79], each KaiC hexamer dissipates 1400–1800 kBT over each cycle. Ref. [44] has demonstrated that such dissipa-tion is not only localized on the boundary of state space: the steady-state dissipation rates for reactions in the bulk are comparable to those on the boundary. We thus as-sume that the free energy dissipated per oscillation cycle is divided equally among all 364 pairs of forward/reverse reactions in our state space. This gives a thermodynamic force ranging from 3.8 to 4.9 kBT .The above estimate corresponds to standard in vitro 

experimental conditions [45, 51]. To map out the full experimentally relevant region in Fig. 4(b), we also con-sider experiments with reduced ATP levels. For exam-ple, Phong et al. 2013 has observed sustained KaiC os-cillations for ATP fractions down to 25% [34]. Under these conditions, we estimate the free energy released from ATP hydrolysis by ∆G = ∆ G0 + ln [ATP] [ADP][P i] , (21) 13 where ∆ G0 ≈ 12 kBT [79]. With [ATP] /[ADP] = 1 /3at 25% ATP and assuming trace amounts of P i present in solution, hydrolysis can still release ∼ 15 kBT of free energy per molecule. This leads to a thermodynamic force of ∼ 3 kBT , included in the hatched region of Fig. 4(b). 

[1] D. Gratz, B. Onal, A. Dalic, and T. J. Hund, Synchro-nization of pacemaking in the sinoatrial node: a mathe-matical modeling study, Frontiers in Physics 6, 63 (2018). [2] P. Richard, B. Teusink, M. B. Hemker, K. Van Dam, and H. V. Westerhoff, Sustained oscillations in free-energy state and hexose phosphates in yeast, Yeast 12 , 731 (1996). [3] J. Wolf and R. Heinrich, Effect of cellular interaction on glycolytic oscillations in yeast: a theoretical investiga-tion, Biochemical Journal 345 , 321 (2000). [4] P. Richard, B. Teusink, H. V. Westerhoff, and K. van Dam, Around the growth phase transition s. cerevisiae’s make-up favours sustained oscillations of intracellular metabolites, FEBS letters 318 , 80 (1993). [5] W. Singer, Striving for coherence, Nature 397 , 391 (1999). [6] K. M. Stiefel and G. B. Ermentrout, Neurons as oscilla-tors, Journal of neurophysiology 116 , 2950 (2016). [7] Y. Kuramoto, Self-entrainment of a population of cou-pled non-linear oscillators, in International Symposium on Mathematical Problems in Theoretical Physics , edited by H. Araki (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidel-berg, 1975) pp. 420–422. [8] Y. Kuramoto, Chemical turbulence, in Chemical oscilla-tions, waves, and turbulence (Springer, 1984) pp. 111– 140. [9] A. Pikovsky, M. Rosenblum, and J. Kurths, Synchroniza-tion, Cambridge university press 12 (2001). [10] J. A. Acebr´ on, L. L. Bonilla, C. J. P´ erez Vicente, F. Ri-tort, and R. Spigler, The kuramoto model: A simple paradigm for synchronization phenomena, Reviews of modern physics 77 , 137 (2005). [11] Y. Park, S. Heitmann, and G. B. Ermentrout, The utility of phase models in studying neural synchroniza-tion, Computational models of brain and behavior , 493 (2017). [12] Y. Park, K. M. Shaw, H. J. Chiel, and P. J. Thomas, The infinitesimal phase response curves of oscillators in piecewise smooth dynamical systems, European Journal of Applied Mathematics 29 , 905 (2018). [13] M. Kreider and P. J. Thomas, On the relation between infinitesimal shape response curves and phase-amplitude reduction for single and coupled limit-cycle oscillators, SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Systems 23 , 1636 (2024). [14] A. Neiman, Synchronizationlike phenomena in coupled stochastic bistable systems, Physical Review E 49 , 3484 (1994). [15] S. K. Han, T. G. Yim, D. Postnov, and O. Sosnovtseva, Interacting coherence resonance oscillators, Physical Re-view Letters 83 , 1771 (1999). [16] J. Freund, A. Neiman, and L. Schimansky-Geier, Ana-lytic description of noise-induced phase synchronization, EPL (Europhysics Letters) 50 , 8 (2000). [17] L. Callenbach, P. H¨ anggi, S. J. Linz, J. A. Freund, and L. Schimansky-Geier, Oscillatory systems driven by noise: Frequency and phase synchronization, Physical Review E 65 , 051110 (2002). [18] G. S. Medvedev, Synchronization of coupled stochas-tic limit cycle oscillators, Physics Letters A 374 , 1712 (2010). [19] A. Zakharova, J. Kurths, T. Vadivasova, and A. Koseska, Analysing dynamical behavior of cellular networks via stochastic bifurcations, PloS one 6, e19696 (2011). [20] A. Zakharova, A. Feoktistov, T. Vadivasova, and E. Sch¨ oll, Coherence resonance and stochastic synchro-nization in a nonlinear circuit near a subcritical hopf bi-furcation, The European Physical Journal Special Topics 

222 , 2481 (2013). [21] R. M. Amro, B. Lindner, and A. B. Neiman, Phase dif-fusion in unequally noisy coupled oscillators, Physical re-view letters 115 , 034101 (2015). [22] Z. Deng, S. Arsenault, L. Mao, and J. Arnold, Measuring synchronization of stochastic oscillators in biology, Jour-nal of Physics: Conference Series 750 , 012001 (2016). [23] M. Kreider, B. Lindner, and P. J. Thomas, Q-functions, synchronization, and arnold tongues for coupled stochas-tic oscillators, Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 35 (2025). [24] M. Kreider, P. J. Thomas, and Y. Li, Artificial neural network solver for fokker-planck and koopman eigenfunc-tions, arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.20339 (2025). [25] J. Garcia-Ojalvo, M. B. Elowitz, and S. H. Strogatz, Modeling a synthetic multicellular clock: repressilators coupled by quorum sensing, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101 , 10955 (2004). [26] A. Nandi, S. G, R. B. Singh, and R. Ramaswamy, Effec-tive mechanisms for the synchronization of stochastic os-cillators, Physical Review E—Statistical, Nonlinear, and Soft Matter Physics 76 , 041136 (2007). [27] T.-L. To, M. A. Henson, E. D. Herzog, and F. J. Doyle, A molecular model for intercellular synchronization in the mammalian circadian clock, Biophysical journal 92 , 3792 (2007). [28] J. Kim, P. Heslop-Harrison, I. Postlethwaite, and D. G. Bates, Stochastic noise and synchronisation during dic-tyostelium aggregation make camp oscillations robust, PLoS computational biology 3, e218 (2007). [29] S. E. Cohen and S. S. Golden, Circadian rhythms in cyanobacteria, Microbiology and Molecular Biology Re-views 79 , 373 (2015). [30] A. G. Chavan, J. A. Swan, J. Heisler, C. Sancar, D. C. Ernst, M. Fang, J. G. Palacios, R. K. Spangler, C. R. Bagshaw, S. Tripathi, et al. , Reconstitution of an intact clock reveals mechanisms of circadian timekeeping, Sci-ence 374 , eabd4453 (2021). [31] M. Nakajima, K. Imai, H. Ito, T. Nishiwaki, Y. Mu-rayama, H. Iwasaki, T. Oyama, and T. Kondo, Recon-stitution of circadian oscillation of cyanobacterial KaiC phosphorylation in vitro, science 308 , 414 (2005). [32] M. J. Rust, J. S. Markson, W. S. Lane, D. S. Fisher, and E. K. O’Shea, Ordered phosphorylation governs oscilla-14 

tion of a three-protein circadian clock, Science 318 , 809 (2007). [33] T. Mori, D. R. Williams, M. O. Byrne, X. Qin, M. Egli, H. S. Mchaourab, P. L. Stewart, and C. H. Johnson, Elu-cidating the ticking of an in vitro circadian clockwork, PLoS biology 5, e93 (2007). [34] C. Phong, J. S. Markson, C. M. Wilhoite, and M. J. Rust, Robust and tunable circadian rhythms from differentially sensitive catalytic domains, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110 , 1124 (2013). [35] J. Lin, J. Chew, U. Chockanathan, and M. J. Rust, Mix-tures of opposing phosphorylations within hexamers pre-cisely time feedback in the cyanobacterial circadian clock, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111 ,E3937 (2014). [36] T. Mori, S. Sugiyama, M. Byrne, C. H. Johnson, T. Uchi-hashi, and T. Ando, Revealing circadian mechanisms of integration and resilience by visualizing clock proteins working in real time, Nature communications 9, 1 (2018). [37] J. Chew, E. Leypunskiy, J. Lin, A. Murugan, and M. J. Rust, High protein copy number is required to suppress stochasticity in the cyanobacterial circadian clock, Na-ture communications 9, 3004 (2018). [38] Y. Liu, G. K. Pattanayak, C. Chi, H. Yoo, A. R. Dinner, and M. J. Rust, An underlying bistability sets amplitude and explains temperature compensation in the cyanobac-terial circadian clock, bioRxiv , 2026 (2026). [39] J. S. van Zon, D. K. Lubensky, P. R. Altena, and P. R. ten Wolde, An allosteric model of circadian KaiC phosphory-lation, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 

104 , 7420 (2007). [40] J. Paijmans, D. K. Lubensky, and P. R. Ten Wolde, A thermodynamically consistent model of the post-translational Kai circadian clock, PLoS computational biology 13 , e1005415 (2017). [41] M. Sasai, Mechanism of autonomous synchronization of the circadian kaiabc rhythm, Scientific Reports 11 , 4713 (2021). [42] M. Sasai, Role of the reaction-structure coupling in tem-perature compensation of the kaiabc circadian rhythm, PLOS Computational Biology 18 , e1010494 (2022). [43] M. Sasai and S. Fujishiro, Molecular clockwork hypoth-esis for the kaiabc circadian oscillations, bioRxiv , 2026 (2026). [44] C. Zheng and E. Tang, A topological mechanism for ro-bust and efficient global oscillations in biological net-works, Nature Communications 15 , 6453 (2024). [45] H. Kageyama, T. Nishiwaki, M. Nakajima, H. Iwasaki, T. Oyama, and T. Kondo, Cyanobacterial circadian pace-maker: Kai protein complex dynamics in the KaiC phos-phorylation cycle in vitro, Molecular cell 23 , 161 (2006). [46] C. Brettschneider, R. J. Rose, S. Hertel, I. M. Axmann, A. J. Heck, and M. Kollmann, A sequestration feedback determines dynamics and temperature entrainment of the KaiABC circadian clock, Molecular Systems Biology 

6, 389 (2010). [47] D. Gonze, J. Halloy, and P. Gaspard, Biochemical clocks and molecular noise: Theoretical study of robustness fac-tors, The Journal of chemical physics 116 , 10997 (2002). [48] D. Gonze, S. Bernard, C. Waltermann, A. Kramer, and H. Herzel, Spontaneous synchronization of coupled circa-dian oscillators, Biophysical journal 89 , 120 (2005). [49] T. Zhou, J. Zhang, Z. Yuan, and L. Chen, Synchroniza-tion of genetic oscillators, Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear Science 18 (2008). [50] S. Pu and P. J. Thomas, Fast and accurate Langevin sim-ulations of stochastic Hodgkin-Huxley dynamics, Neural computation 32 , 1775 (2020). [51] T. Nishiwaki, Y. Satomi, Y. Kitayama, K. Terauchi, R. Kiyohara, T. Takao, and T. Kondo, A sequential pro-gram of dual phosphorylation of KaiC as a basis for cir-cadian rhythm in cyanobacteria, The EMBO journal 26 ,4029 (2007). [52] N. G. Van Kampen and W. P. Reinhardt, Stochastic pro-cesses in physics and chemistry (1983). [53] T. L. Hill, Free Energy Transduction And Biochemical Cycle Kinetics (Springer-Verlag, New York, NY, 1989). [54] X. Qin, M. Byrne, T. Mori, P. Zou, D. R. Williams, H. Mchaourab, and C. H. Johnson, Intermolecular as-sociations determine the dynamics of the circadian Ka-iABC oscillator, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107 , 14805 (2010). [55] J. Snijder, J. M. Schuller, A. Wiegard, P. L¨ ossl, N. Schmelling, I. M. Axmann, J. M. Plitzko, F. F¨ orster, and A. J. Heck, Structures of the cyanobacterial circa-dian oscillator frozen in a fully assembled state, Science 

355 , 1181 (2017). [56] A. C. Barato and U. Seifert, Coherence of biochemical os-cillations is bounded by driving force and network topol-ogy, Physical Review E 95 , 062409 (2017). [57] A. P´ erez-Cervera, B. Gutkin, P. J. Thomas, and B. Lind-ner, A universal description of stochastic oscillators, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 120 ,e2303222120 (2023). [58] A. P´ erez-Cervera, B. Lindner, and P. J. Thomas, Quan-titative comparison of the mean–return-time phase and the stochastic asymptotic phase for noisy oscillators, Bi-ological Cybernetics 116 , 219 (2022). [59] K. Terauchi, Y. Kitayama, T. Nishiwaki, K. Miwa, Y. Murayama, T. Oyama, and T. Kondo, ATPase ac-tivity of KaiC determines the basic timing for circa-dian clock of cyanobacteria, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104 , 16377 (2007). [60] K. Ito-Miwa, Y. Furuike, S. Akiyama, and T. Kondo, Tuning the circadian period of cyanobacteria up to 6.6 days by the single amino acid substitutions in kaic, Pro-ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117 , 20926 (2020). [61] Y. Kitayama, H. Iwasaki, T. Nishiwaki, and T. Kondo, KaiB functions as an attenuator of KaiC phosphorylation in the cyanobacterial circadian clock system, The EMBO journal 22 , 2127 (2003). [62] D. T. Gillespie, Exact stochastic simulation of coupled chemical reactions, The journal of physical chemistry 81 ,2340 (1977). [63] J. H. Goldwyn and E. Shea-Brown, The what and where of adding channel noise to the hodgkin-huxley equations, PLoS computational biology 7, e1002247 (2011). [64] P. Orio and D. Soudry, Simple, fast and accurate imple-mentation of the diffusion approximation algorithm for stochastic ion channels with multiple states, PLoS one 7,e36670 (2012). [65] R. Tseng, N. F. Goularte, A. Chavan, J. Luu, S. E. Co-hen, Y.-G. Chang, J. Heisler, S. Li, A. K. Michael, S. Tri-pathi, et al. , Structural basis of the day-night transition in a bacterial circadian clock, Science 355 , 1174 (2017). [66] A. Mukaiyama, Y. Furuike, J. Abe, S.-i. Koda, E. Ya-mashita, T. Kondo, and S. Akiyama, Conformational re-15 

arrangements of the c1 ring in kaic measure the timing of assembly with kaib, Scientific reports 8, 8803 (2018). [67] Y. M. Jeong, C. Dias, C. Diekman, H. Brochon, P. Kim, M. Kaur, Y.-S. Kim, H.-I. Jang, and Y.-I. Kim, Magne-sium regulates the circadian oscillator in cyanobacteria, Journal of biological rhythms 34 , 380 (2019). [68] K. Hitomi, T. Oyama, S. Han, A. S. Arvai, and E. D. Getzoff, Tetrameric architecture of the circadian clock protein kaib: a novel interface for intermolecular interac-tions and its impact on the circadian rhythm, Journal of Biological Chemistry 280 , 19127 (2005). [69] Y.-G. Chang, S. E. Cohen, C. Phong, W. K. Myers, Y.-I. Kim, R. Tseng, J. Lin, L. Zhang, J. S. Boyd, Y. Lee, 

et al. , A protein fold switch joins the circadian oscilla-tor to clock output in cyanobacteria, Science 349 , 324 (2015). [70] M. Kaur, A. Ng, P. Kim, C. Diekman, and Y.-I. Kim, Cika modulates the effect of kaia on the period of the circadian oscillation in kaic phosphorylation, Journal of biological rhythms 34 , 218 (2019). [71] G. Buzsaki, Rhythms of the Brain (Oxford university press, 2006). [72] S. Danø, P. G. Sørensen, and F. Hynne, Sustained oscil-lations in living cells, Nature 402 , 320 (1999). [73] P. J. Thomas and B. Lindner, Asymptotic phase for stochastic oscillators, Physical review letters 113 , 254101 (2014). [74] J. T. Schwabedal and A. Pikovsky, Phase description of stochastic oscillations, Physical review letters 110 ,204102 (2013). [75] S. H. Strogatz, Nonlinear dynamics and chaos: with ap-plications to physics, biology, chemistry, and engineering 

(Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2024). [76] C. E. Dangerfield, D. Kay, and K. Burrage, Modeling ion channel dynamics through reflected stochastic differen-tial equations, Physical Review E—Statistical, Nonlin-ear, and Soft Matter Physics 85 , 051907 (2012). [77] D. Pezo, D. Soudry, and P. Orio, Diffusion approximation-based simulation of stochastic ion chan-nels: which method to use?, Frontiers in computational neuroscience 8, 139 (2014). [78] S. E. Derenzo, W.-S. Choong, and W. W. Moses, Fun-damental limits of scintillation detector timing precision, Physics in Medicine & Biology 59 , 3261 (2014). [79] R. Milo and R. Phillips, Cell biology by the numbers (Gar-land Science, 2015).