Title: Inhibiting the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex selectively enhances unsupervised statistical learning

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.08.08.669288v3.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
Inhibiting the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex selectively enhances unsupervised statistical 

learning 

Orsolya Pesthy* 1,2 , Zsuzsanna Viktória Pesthy* 2,3,4, Teodóra Vékony 5, Karolina Janacsek 4,6, Dániel 

Fabó 7,8,9,10 , Dezso Nemeth 1,5,11 

1 Centre de  Recherche en Neurosciences de Lyon, INSERM, CNRS, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, 

CRNL U1028 UMR5292, Bron, France 

2 Brain, Memory and Language Research Group, Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience and Psychology, 

HUN -REN Research Centre for Natural Sciences, Budapest, Hungary 

3 Doctoral School of Psychology, ELTE Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary 

4 Institute of Psychology, ELTE Eötvös Loránd University, Budapest, Hungary 

5 Gran Canaria Cognitive Research Center, Atlántico Medio University, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, 

Spain 

6 Centre for Thinking and Learning, Institute for Lifecourse Development, School of Human Sciences, 

Faculty of Education, Health and Human Sciences, University of Greenwich, London, United Kingdom 

7 Flash Clinic, Budapest, Hungary 

8 Department of Neurology, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary 

9 Department of Behavioral Sciences, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary 

10 Dept of Voice, Speech and Swallowing, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary 

11 BML -NAP Research Group, Institute of Psychology, Eötvös Loránd University & Institute of 

Cognitive Neuroscience and Psychology, HUN -REN Research Centre for Natural Sciences, Budapest, 

Hungary   

> *These authors contributed equally to this article
> Corresponding author: Orsolya Pesthy, email: pesthy.orsolya@gmail.com

Keywords: statistical learning, unsupervised learning, episodic retrieval, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, 

transcranial magnetic stimulation 

Abstract 

The brain must balance the automatic extraction of environmental regularities with top -down cognitive 

control, yet the causal neural mechanisms governing this interplay are debated. In particular, the 

hemispheric contributions of the dorsolateral prefronta l cortex (DLPFC) remain unresolved. Here, we 

applied inhibitory repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) to the left, right, or bilateral 

DLPFC in 95 healthy adults during a probabilistic sequence learning task. We found that inhibiting the 

righ t and bilateral DLPFC significantly enhanced statistical learning compared to sham and left DLPFC 

stimulation. Contrary to the hypothesis that this competition is mediated by the suppression of existing 

knowledge, episodic memory performance was unaffected across all stimulation groups. These findings 

challenge a direct episodic gating mechanism and suggest the DLPFC's influence on statistical learning 

is hemisphere -dependent. As an alternative, we propose that right DLPFC inhibition shifts cognitive 

proces sing toward a more exploratory information -sampling strategy, a view supported by our finding 

of significantly greater reaction time variability in the right and bilateral stimulation groups. Together, 

our results provide causal evidence for a right -latera lized suppressive influence of the DLPFC on 

unsupervised learning and suggest its modulatory role is linked to information processing style rather 

than direct competition with episodic memory systems. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.08.669288 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Introduction 

The brain resembles an ecosystem, wherein multiple cognitive processes interact and compete for 

influence over behaviour 1,2 . Adaptation to novel environments requires neural plasticity, long attributed 

to supervised or reinforcement learning, optimized by model -based processes. However, mounting 

evidence suggests that neural plasticity can also emerge through passive, unreward ed exposure to 

structured input, highlighting a fundamental role for unsupervised learning, which is in turn o ptimized 

by model -free processes 3,4 . Building on the hypothesis that unsupervised and supervised mechanisms 

shape representations jointly, we examine a critical instance of this process in humans: statistical learning 

(the acquisition of probability -based regularities without feedback or re ward), and its balance with 

model -based memory retrieval. According to the competition hypothesis, model -free (such as statistical 

learning) and model -based (such as executive functions or episodic retrieval) processes rely on 

overlapping neural resources and may therefore inhibit each other, with the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 

(DLPFC) serving as a key hub in controlling their balance 1,5 –9. One proposed mechanism is that the 

DLPFC acts as a gate to long -term memory thus, its inhibition hinders retrieval while simultaneously 

supporting the encodin g of novel statistical structure 9. To test this hypothesis, we applied inhibitory 

repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) to the left, right, or bilateral DLPFC in healthy 

participants, assessing its impact on both statistical learning and episodic memory retrieval. 

The antagonistic relationship between DLPFC activity and the model -free process of statistical learning 

has been well -documented. Specifically, reduced DLPFC engagement has been consistently associated 

with enhanced statistical learning performance. This h as been observed in various groups with reduced 

DLPFC activity, such as children (compared to adults) 10 –12 , individuals under hypnosis 13 or 

depletion 2,14,15 . Importantly, studies using inhibitory non -invasive brain stimulation on the bilateral 

DLPFC have shown better learning 9, and retrieval 16 of probabilistic information in the DLPFC -inhibited 

group compared to the controls. These findings together suggest an inverse relationship between DLPFC 

activity and statistical learning, demonstrated through both correlational and causal evidence (altho ugh 

see ref 17 ) However, this alone does not clarify which mechanism drives the competition. 

The hemisphere -dependent involvement of the DLPFC in statistical learning may offer valuable insight 

into its underlying mechanisms. Neuropsychological studies have shown a right hemisphere dominance 

in statistical learning, highlighting that statistical l earning remains intact when solely the right 

hemisphere remains available in split -brain and unilaterally lesioned patients, whereas the left 

hemisphere supports systematic hypothesis -testing - essentially, model -based functioning 18,19 . This 

asymmetry seems to extend to the role of the DLPFC, where improved statistical learning has been 

observed following inhibition of the left or facilitation of the right DLPFC 14,15,17 . However, findings 

remain inconsistent, with some studies reporting the opposite pattern 20 –22 or null results 23,24 . A proposed 

mechanistic explanation is rooted in hemispheric differences in decision strategies: the right hemisphere 

favors selecting the most probable option each time (frequency -maximizing strategy), while the left 

hemisphere engages in choosing each o ption in proportion to its occurrence frequency (frequency -

matching strategy) 19 . While the latter supports causal inference, statistical learning, in which frequency 

is the key information source, may benefit more from frequency -maximizing strategies 4. Although this 

account is compelling, the lateralization of statistical learning remains unresolved due to inconsistencies 

in the literature. To move beyond descriptive accounts and clarify the role of DLPFC asymmetry, we 

applied repetitive transcranial m agnetic stimulation (rTMS) over the left, right, and bilateral DLPFC, and 

examined its effects on both statistical learning and episodic memory retrieval. 

In the domain of episodic retrieval, most findings align with the competition hypothesis and the DLPFC’s 

proposed gatekeeping role in regulating access to long -term memory. A positive relationship between 

DLPFC functioning and episodic retrieval performance has been shown, although null results are 

common as well (for a review, see ref 25 ). This pattern suggests that the DLPFC may modulate memory 

access, possibly through a working memory involvement 26 . However, it remains unclear whether 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.08.669288 doi: bioRxiv preprint

downregulating episodic retrieval facilitates the encoding of new statistical regularities 9. To directly test 

this, we included an episodic memory task in our study, allowing us to examine whether DLPFC 

modulation affects retrieval performance and whether this, in turn, relates to statistical learning 

outcomes. Hemispheric asymmetries offer furt her insight. According to the classic Hemispheric 

Encoding/Retrieval Asymmetry (HERA) model 27,28 , the left prefrontal cortex plays a greater role in 

encoding, while the right is more engaged during retrieval. Additional factors, such as stimulus modality 

(verbal stimuli are more left -lateralized, visual stimuli more right -lateralized), emotional vale nce (with 

mixed findings), and familiarity (with the DLPFC particularly engaged in the recall of novel stimuli), 

further shape lateralization effects 25 . To control for these variables, our memory task used novel, 

emotionally neutral stimuli incorporating both verbal and visual elements. Crucially, if increased 

statistical learning is observed in tandem with impaired episodic retrieval especially fol lowing right 

DLPFC stimulation this would lend support to the hypothesis that the DLPFC acts as a cognitive gate 

to long -term memory. When this gate is weakened, the system may become more receptive to encoding 

novel statistical patterns. 

We aimed to address open questions about the effects of DLPFC inhibition on statistical learning and 

episodic memory. We applied 1 Hz (inhibitory) rTMS over the left, right, or bilateral Brodma nn 9 area 

to target the DLPFC. In this sham -controlled study, stimulation was on in the breaks of task performance 

when participants performed on a statistical learning and an episodic retrieval task in a randomized order. 

Furthermore, we re -tested the participants after a 24h delay. We had the following expectations regarding 

the intervention effect: 

1.  In this study, we go beyond the findings of Ambrus et al. 9 by addressing a key open question: the 

hemispheric asymmetry in statistical learning. Specifically, we aim to identify which hemisphere 

plays a more critical role in this process. If 1 Hz inhibitory rTMS over the left hemisphere 

enhances statistical learn ing performance, it would support right -hemisphere dominance in 

statistical learning, emphasizing the role of different cognitive strategies as a background 

mechanism 19 . Conversely, if altered excitability of the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex leads 

to improved statistical learning, it would raise the possibility of a right -hemisphere gating 

mechanism, in line with the classic HERA model. 

2.  Our study was designed to test competing hypotheses about the DLPFC's gatekeeping function –

its role in controlling access to the long -term memory systems that store prior knowledge and 

internal models. Based on this hypothesis, we predict enhanced statistical learning will be 

accompanied by impaired episodic retrieval in the stimulation groups. If, however, DLPFC 

inhibition affects statistical learning independently of episodic memory, it would suggest that the 

DLPFC's influence on statistical learning is mechanistically distinct from its role in accessing the 

model -based priors required for episodic retrieval. 

Results 

Is there a difference between the groups in statistical learning? Reaction time analysis .

We used the Alternating Serial Reaction Time (ASRT) task to assess statistical learning. In this task, 

learning is signified by the performance difference between high - and low -probability triplets: if 

participants react faster to stimuli that belong to a triplet that occurs with a high probability as compared 

to triplets that occur with a low probability, it means they have an implicit knowledge of the underlying 

regularity. The linear mixed -effect model on RT revealed a significant main effect of Epoch, i ndicating 

that participants became faster throughout the task, regardless of triplet types ( F(5, 183988.17) = 728.44, 

p < 0.001). This general improvement differed between the groups, as reflected by a significant Group × 

Epoch interaction ( F(15, 183988.17) = 4.02, p < 0.001). The post hoc comparisons showed that the sham 

and the right group improved in RT in all epochs, except between the 4th and 5th epochs (p < 0.027 in 

all consecutive epoch pairs besides 4 -5th, where p = 0.539), where they stagnated. The left group sho wed 

a similar pattern, except that they did not improve between the 3rd and 4th epochs (p = 0.795), but did 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.08.669288 doi: bioRxiv preprint

so between all others (p < 0.001 in all other consecutive epoch pairs). The bilateral group improved 

during the whole task (p < 0.044). A significant main effect of Triplet Type was also observed ( F(1, 

183988.40) = 486.98, p < 0.001), with faster responses to high -probability triplets than to low -probability 

ones indicating statistical learning. The difference between the Triplet Types changed over time, shown 

by the Epoch × Triplet Type interaction ( F(5, 183988.32) = 17.54, p < 0.001), signifying learning 

improved over time. There was no significant Group main effect, indicating that the groups showed 

similar overall RT if we disregard triplet types ( F(3, 91.13) = 0.88, p = 0.453). Most importantly, we 

found a significant Group × Triplet Type interaction ( F(3, 183988.40) = 3.71, p = 0.011), showing that 

the magnitude of the statistical learning effect (i.e., the RT difference between high - and low -probability 

triplets) varied across groups. The right stimulation group demonstrated significantly greater stati stical 

learning than the sham group ( p = 0.005, SE = 1.14) and the left stimulation group ( p = 0.032, SE = 1.17). 

Additionally, the bilateral stimulation group outperformed the sham group ( p = 0.015, SE = 1.12). A 

trend -level difference was also observed between the bilateral and left stimulation groups, with the 

bilateral group showing better learning ( p = 0.079, SE = 1.15). This Group × Triplet Type interaction is 

illustrated in Figure 2. However, this difference between the groups in statistical learning did not change 

over time, as the Epoch × Triplet Type × Group interaction was not significant ( F(15, 183988.32) = 0.53, 

p = 0 .927; see Figure 1). The model's explanatory power was modest (Marginal R² = 0.029, Conditional 

R² = 0.171). For the details of the model, see Supplementary Table S 1.

Figure 1. Reaction times to high - and low -probability triplets in sham, right, left, and bilateral stimulation groups. The figure 

displays reaction times (in milliseconds) for high -probability ( orange ) and low -probability ( purple ) triplets across six epochs 

(x -axis). The panels (arranged from top right to bottom left) correspond to the sham, right, left, and bilateral DLPFC 

stimulation groups. The difference in reaction times between high - and low -probability triplets indicates st atistical learning. 

The dashed grey l ine between the 5th and 6th epochs marks the 24 -hour interval between the two experimental sessions. Error 

bars represent 95% confidence intervals of the mean reaction time. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.08.669288 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 2. Group differences in reaction time (RT) learning score. Learning scores were computed as the difference between 

RT to low - and high -probability triplets (RT low − RT high ) and averaged within each stimulation group (sham, right, left, 

bilateral). Higher values reflect stronger statistical learning. Bars represent group mean learning scores, and error bars indicate 

95% confidence intervals of the mean. Asterisks indicate statistical significance (*p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01). 

Is there a difference between the groups in statistical learning? Accuracy analysis. 

The generalized linear mixed model (GLMM) on accuracy (ACC) revealed a significant main effect of 

Epoch , χ² (5) = 141.50, p < 0.001, indicating that participants became more accurate at the beginning of 

the task ( Epoch 1–2) and less accurate in the later phases ( Epoch 4–5), consistent with practice and 

fatigue effects. A robust main effect of Triplet Type was also observed, χ² (1) = 363.95, p < 0.001, with 

higher accuracy for high -probability compared to low -probability triplets, indicating statistical learning. 

The main effect of Group was not significant, χ² (3) = 5.46, p = 0 .141, suggesting no overall group 

differences in accuracy. Similarly, there were no significant two -way interactions between Group and 

Epoch , χ² (15) = 13.69, p = 0. 549, or between Group and Triplet Type, χ² (3) = 2.53, p = 0. 470. In contrast, 

the Epoch × Triplet Type interaction was significant, χ² (5) = 32.35, p < 0.001, sugges ting that the 

magnitude of statistical learning fluctuated across different time points. However, the three -way Group 

× Epoch × Triplet Type interaction was not significant, χ² (15) = 14.48, p = 0. 489, indicating no reliable 

group -specific dynamics in the evolution of statistical learning. Figure 3 illustrates the time course of 

accuracy across the stimulation groups. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.08.669288 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 3. Accuracy to high - and low -probability triplets in sham, right, left and bilateral stimulation groups. The figure 

displays accuracy for high -probability (orange) and low -probability (purple) triplets across six epochs (x -axis). The panels, 

arranged clockw ise from the top left, correspond to the groups as follows: top -left – sham; top -right – right stimulation; 

bottom -right – bilateral stimulation; bottom -left – left stimulation. The difference between high - and low -probability triplets 

serves as an index o f statistical learning. The dashed grey line between the 5th and 6th epochs marks the 24 -hour interval 

between the two experimental sessions. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals of the mean accuracy. 

Model -estimated reaction times and accuracy for high - and low -probability triplets across stimulation 

groups and epochs are presented in Supplementary Figures S1 and S2. 

Do the groups differ in episodic retrieval? 

In item memory, there was a significant main effect of epoch ( F(2.27, 197.29) = 30.01, p < 0.001, η² p =

0. 256, BF incl > 2.47×10 17 ), indicating that item memory scores decreased across time (forgetting across 

epochs, pHolm ≤ 0.015). The Epoch × Group interaction was not significant ( F(6.80, 197.29) = 0.66, p =

0. 70, η²p = 0.022, BF incl = 0.073), suggesting that changes over time did not differ significantly between 

groups. The main effect of Group was also not significant ( F(3, 87 ) = 1.12, p = 0. 344, η²p = 0.037, BF incl 

= 0.018), indicating a lack of significant group differences in item memory. The results are presented in 

Figure 4 panel A. The automatic association scores showed a similar pattern: the significant Epoch main 

effect ( F(2.08, 181.11) = 4.07, p = 0.017, η²p = 0.045, BF incl = 3.595), indicated forgetting in the second 

session (i.e., the epoch after the 24h delay) compared to the last epoch of the first session, however, this 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.08.669288 doi: bioRxiv preprint

was reduced to a trend after correcting for multiple comparisons ( pHolm = 0.092). Neither the Epoch × 

Group interaction (F(6,24, 181.11) = 0.80, p = 0.574, η²p = 0.027, BF incl = 0.045), nor the Group main 

effect (F(3, 87) = 1.07, p = 0.367, η²p = 0.035, BF incl = 0.032), reached the level of significance, indicating 

no group differences in the overall score, or in the course of forgetting. See Figure 4 panel B for details. 

In the recollection score analysis, the main effect of Epoch was not significant ( F(3, 261) = 1.94, p =

0.124, η²p = 0.022, BF incl = 0.198), indicating no reliable change in recollection scores over time. The 

Epoch × Group interaction was not significant ( F(9, 261) = 0.72, p = 0.690, η²p = 0.024, BF incl = 0.034), 

suggesting that any temporal changes did not differ between groups. The main effect of Group, similarly 

to the other scores, was not significant ( F(3, 87) = 0.71, p = 0.549, η²p = 0.024 , BF incl = 0.024). The 

recollection results are shown on Figure 4 panel C. 

Figure 4 . Paired Associate Learning Task results. The y -axis reflects the three different PALT scores, x -axis show the epoch 

when the data was collected (please note that in Epoch 2 and 4, participants did not perform the PALT task). Colors indicate 

the stimulatio n groups. Error bands show the 95% confidence interval s. Panel A): Item memory score on the y -axis. Panel B): 

Automatic association score on the y -axis. Panel C): Recollection score on the y -axis. 

Exploratory analyses: individual differences 

Does the variance of reaction times differ due to the stimulation? 

To test whether participants in the stimulation groups showed a different variability of reaction times, we 

performed a Levene’s test with group (sham/right/left/bilateral DLPFC stimulation) as the independent 

variable. Levene’s test indicated significant differences in variance across groups [ F(3, 91) = 270.65, p

< 0.001]. Results were confirmed using a Brown –Forsythe test, yielding the same pattern of group 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.08.669288 doi: bioRxiv preprint

differences. The right and the bilateral DLPFC stimulated groups showed significantly higher variances 

compared to the sham and the left DLPFC stimulated groups ( pHolm < 0.001 in each case). For easier 

interpretability, we report the standard deviations (rather than the variance) in Table 1. 

Table 1. RT standard deviations of the groups, by triplet type. 

Triplet type 

group  high  low  total 

sham  80.47  79.25  80.21 

right  90.15  92.91  91.05 

left  76.29  77.09  76.61 

bilateral  92.40  90.94  92.10 

Does working memory correlate differently with statistical learning across groups? 

We tested the correlation between statistical learning (defined as the RT difference of high - and low -

probability triplets throughout the whole task), separately for each group. We found no significant 

correlation in any of the groups, although the bilater al DLPFC stimulated group showed a trend -level 

positive correlation [sham: r(24) = -0.068, p = 0.741; right: r(20) = -0.223, p = 0.296; left: r(21) = -0.089, 

p = 0.686; bilateral: r(22) = 0.369, p = 0.076], see Figure 5. 

Figure 5. Statistical learning as a function of baseline working memory capacity. The y -axis represents the RT difference of 

low - minus high -probability triplets (calculated for the sake of this analysis alone). The x -axis represents the Counting span 

(CSPAN) perfor mance. Dots indicate individual data, lines represent a linear regression trend line, and bands show the 95% 

confidence interval of the regression estimate. 

Discussion 

We aimed to causally assess the role of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) in statistical learning 

– an unsupervised form of learning critical for extracting regularities from sensory input, acquiring new 

skills, and constructing predictive representations – by applying inhibitory transcranial magnetic 

stimulation (rTMS) over the left, right, or bilateral DLPFC. We found that inhibition of the right and 

bilateral DLPFC significantly enhanced statistical learning performance, as indicated by faster r esponses 

to predictable compared to unpredictable stimuli. To examine the functional specificity of this effect, we 

included an episodic memory task as a cognitive control measure. Episodic memory retrieval remained 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.08.669288 doi: bioRxiv preprint

unaffected across all stimulation groups, suggesting that the observed enhancement in statistical learning 

cannot be attributed to a general facilitation or disruption of cognitive performance. Together, these 

findings demonstrate a right -lateralized influ ence of the DLPFC on statistical learning, suggesting that 

this effect may operate through mechanisms distinct from episodic retrieval as measured here. Crucially, 

the selective enhancement of statistical learning in the right and bilateral groups was obse rved in reaction 

times while accuracy remained stable across all groups. This lack of a Group × Triplet Type interaction 

in accuracy suggests that the observed effects reflect a specific modulation of the processing of statistical 

regularities rather than a generalized performance decrement, increased response noise, or a simple 

speed -accuracy trade -off. 

Our findings in the bilateral stimulation group are in line with the only prior rTMS study on the 

acquisition phase of statistical learning using bilateral DLPFC inhibition, which similarly reported 

enhanced learning of probabilistic regularities. One addi tional study has applied bilateral inhibitory 

stimulation during the retrieval phase and found improved retrieval of statistical information 16 . These 

findings provide converging causal evidence for the involvement of the DLPFC in statistical learning, 

contributing to a growing literature suggesting an inverse relationship between DLPFC -mediated 

functions such as executive control and statistical learning performance 7,8,15,29,30 . This inverse 

relationship supports the competition theory, which posits that cognitive control processes although 

beneficial for goal -directed, model -based processes interfere with the automatic, model -free 

mechanisms underpinning statistical l earning. Evidence from functional connectivity and developmental 

studies further supports this interpretation: reduced functional coupling between the DLPFC and other 

brain regions has been associated with improved statistical learning 31,32 4; and the learning advantage 

observed in children may stem from the immaturity of the DLPFC 10 –12,33 . Collectively, these findings 

suggest that reduced prefrontal engagement, whether through development or neuromodulation, can 

facilitate statistical learning by releasing the system from top -down constraints. 

We sought to investigate whether the apparent competition between DLPFC functioning and statistical 

learning could be explained by the DLPFC’s hypothesised control over the access to long -term memory 

(i.e., its gating role) 9. Working memory plays an important role in accessing long -term memory and is 

often conceptualized as a state of activated long -term memory 26 . Since our 1 Hz rTMS stimulation 

targeted a major working memory hub 34,35 , it is reasonable to assume that we also influenced access to 

long -term memory. Based on prior theoretical proposals 9, we hypothesized that disrupting DLPFC 

activity may impair access to pre -existing internal models stored in long -term memory, thereby 

facilitating the acquisition of novel statistical regularities. While our findings on statistical learning 

support this hypothesis, we did not reveal a disruption of episodic retrieval following DLPFC inhibition. 

Thus, we did not find evidence that this effect was mediated by episodic memory interference. 

Alternative gate pathways remain plausible, or gating may happen throu gh different memory systems, 

like semantic or working memory. Overall, while our results do not provide support for a gating 

mechanism based on episodic memory interference, they leave open the possibility that the DLPFC plays 

a modulatory role through alt ernative routes - a hypothesis that warrants further investigation. 

Our hemispheric findings offer a more specific interpretation. A plausible explanation for our results lies 

in the modality -specific lateralization of prefrontal cortex function. Our use of a visuomotor statistical 

learning task aligns perfectly with findings that right DLPFC disruption primarily affects visual 

learning 21,22 . This framework also helps reconcile seemingly conflicting results in the literature, which 

have often reported enhanced verbal statistical learning following left DLPFC disruption 15,29 . This right -

lateralized effect is also broadly consistent with the Hemispheric Encoding/Retrieval Asymmetry 

(HERA) model 27,28 . This model posits a primary role for the right DLPFC in memory retrieval. From this 

perspective, inhibiting the right DLPFC may have impaired access to pre -existing models, shifting the 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.08.669288 doi: bioRxiv preprint

cognitive system toward more data -driven processing and thereby facilitating statistical learning. The 

results on the right hemisphere -specific effect are consistent with the idea that our episodic memory task 

lacked the sensitivity to detect subtle group differences (see limitations), and that statistical learning was 

nonetheless improved via an episodic gating mechanism 9 future studies are needed to test this 

speculation. Taken together, our results provide causal evidence that right DLPFC inhibition enhances 

visuomotor statistical learning, likely by attenuating top -down, memory -based constraints. Future studies 

using systematic, modality -sensiti ve designs are needed to further elaborate this relationship. 

To further interpret our findings, it is essential to consider which cognitive strategies and information 

processing styles are known to support statistical learning. While frequency -maximizing and frequency -

matching strategies were discussed in the introd uction 4,19 , they are unlikely to explain our results, as such 

strategies would predict enhanced learning following left DLPFC inhibition, which we did not observe. 

An alternative potential mechanism draws from reinforcement learning research: trying new, 

undiscovere d patterns (that is, exploration as opposed to exploitation) and a broader, more distributed 

attention to various environmental signals (that is, broader information sampling) can facilitate the early 

acquisition of probabilistic regularities 36,37 , as frequent re -sampling could lead to a deeper knowledge of 

statistical structures that are inherently probabilistic (for a discussion, see ref 38 ). Although our study was 

not specifically designed to assess differences in exploration/exploitation or their causal relationship with 

statistical learning, we propose that right and bilateral DLPFC inhibition fostered a shift toward a more 

exploratory in formation -sampling strategy. This interpretation is supported by our finding of 

significantly greater RT variability a well -established behavioural proxy for exploration 39 –41 in the 

same groups that showed enhanced learning. We speculate that the observed benefits after right and 

bilateral DLPFC inhibition in statistical learning may reflect a shift toward a broader, more exploratory 

information processing style. 

The observed shift toward broader, more exploratory information sampling may be caused by the 

disruption of working memory: lower DLPFC functioning and thus lower working memory have been 

linked to such a strategy 42,43 . Individuals with reduced working memory capacity (such as children or 

participants undergoing DLPFC inhibition in our study) tend to re -sample their environment more 

frequently, as previously acquired information is more susceptible to decay 42 . This explanation is 

compelling because our stimulation target, the Brodmann 9 area, is known for its role in working 

memory 35,44 , and it is consistent with extensive evidence that working memory exerts a modulatory 

influence on statistical learning 7,8,21 . This interpretation is further strengthened by a recent work 

indicating that TMS over the DLPFC facilitates inhibitory firings in executive control -related networks 

on the cell -level 45 . This framework may also reconcile the above -mentioned conflicting findings 

regarding the lateralization of statistical learning. Inhibiting verbal working memory, which shows a 

well -established left -lateralization 46 –49 , may result in a broader information sampling strategy in the 

verbal domain 50 , benefiting verbal statistical learning tasks 15,29 . But in our visuomotor statistical learning 

task, verbal working memory (and thus, broader verbal information sampling) could have little effect, 

hence the null result in the left stimulation group. On the other hand, right stimulation may have been 

effec tive because it influenced visual working memory (known to be right -lateralized 44,46 –49 , thus shifting 

visual processing to be more explorative. While our study was not designed to directly test this 

hypothesis, exploratory analyses offer tentative support. Specifically, we observed a trend -level positive 

correlation between working memory c apacity and statistical learning in the bilateral group, suggesting 

that DLPFC inhibition may enhance statistical learning, particularly in individuals with higher baseline 

working memory capacity showing the baseline working memory’s relation to the stimulation 

effectiveness (see Figure 5). Taken together, we speculate that DLPFC inhibition may reduce working 

memory maintenance of prior samples, promoting increased environmental exploration, which facilitates 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.08.669288 doi: bioRxiv preprint

statistical learning of probabilistic regularities future studies should be designed specifically to probe 

this mechanism. 

Collectively, our findings fit within recent theoretical frameworks that challenge area -centric models of 

cognition in favor of dis tributed, brain -wide dynamics. Hayden and colleagues 51 argue that the 

"arealization paradigm" – treating cortical regions as stable, modular units – obscures the context -

dependent nature of ne ural computation. In parallel, Rosen and Freedman 52 suggest that while cognitive 

signals are broadly reflected across the brain, they are not ubiquitous, appearing instead in task -

dependent, reconfiguring networks. Our results operationalize these ideas: inhibitory rTMS over the 

DLPFC did not eliminate a c ategorical function but instead dynamically reweighted the balance of 

processing within a large -scale network. The selective enhancement of statistical learning following right 

and bilateral inhibition – coupled with increased reaction time variability and preserved episodic memory 

– is inconsistent with strict localization or simple gating accounts. Rather, reducing right -prefrontal top -

down constraints likely shifted the system toward a more exploratory, distributed, model -free state 

through affecting larger networks, rather than sol ely the DLPFC. This demonstrates that cognitive 

outcomes reflect the dynamic reweighting of large -scale networks rather than the isolated engagement 

of discrete areas, providing a causal bridge between neuroanatomy and function al flexibility. 

A key limitation of our study is our choice of task for episodic memory retrieval. We found reliable null 

effects on episodic retrieval regarding the stimulation effects, which were supported by Bayesian 

evidence. Although it is not without example to find no DLPFC -related effect on episodic memory, the 

majority of studies were able to show a relation to the DLPFC 25 . This may have multiple explanations. 

As we could see earlier, DLPFC lateralization greatly depends on the modality of the task in many 

cognitive functions, and episodic memory is no exception 27,28,53 . Our task had both visual and verbal 

elements, enabling participants to use their preferred strategy, either verbal or visual. Thus, this task was 

a suboptimal choice for a study that wanted to explore lateral effects. However, compensation from the 

non -inhibited strategy (verbal in the case of left inhibition, visual in the case of right inhibition) does not 

account for our results in the bilateral group: when both hemispheres are inhibited, we should have seen 

the effect if it were there. Furthermore, th e PALT measures a specific form of associative memory. It is 

therefore possible that the DLPFC’s gating function does not act through this declarative retrieval but 

rather through other forms of memory that are more integral to the online processing of sta tistical 

information. For instance, DLPFC inhibition may have disrupted access to semantic representations or 

the short -term maintenance of statistical priors within working memory itself cognitive processes not 

captured by our episodic task. Neverthe less, the question arises whether our task, and the power in our 

study was sufficient to capture group differences. The task was able to capture memory changes per se, 

demonstrated by the item memory and automatic association scores reliably showing expect ed temporal 

dynamics (i.e., forgetting across epochs in item memory). We acknowledge that recollection failed to 

sensitively reflect the expected dynamics, thus, this score should be interpreted with caution. However, 

the Bayesian analyses provided moderat e-to -strong evidence against group differences, thus, the null 

results are unlikely to derive from power issues. Future studies should systematically explore the effect 

of modality and test various memory systems in relation to statistical learning to clar ify the precise nature 

of the DLPFC's modulatory role. 

The present study employed a stimulation methodology consistent with prior work (e.g. ref 9,16,54 –62 )

Nevertheless, several methodological refinements could further increase anatomical precision and 

control for non -specific stimulation effects in future investigations. For example, incorporating MRI -

guided neuronavigation would reduce inter -individual anat omical variability and allow more precise 

characterization of the stimulated subregion within PFC 63 . Similarly, employing an active control site 

within participants, a dedicated sham coil, or alternative sham protocols that better reproduce 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.08.669288 doi: bioRxiv preprint

somatosensory aspects of stimulation would provide a stronger control for non -specific effects. While 

we acknowledge that these methodological improvements could have further strengthened our results, 

they do not fundamentally question the interpretation o f our results. Several aspects of the present 

findings argue against a primarily non -specific or placebo -based explanation. First, the two lateral 

stimulation groups essentially served as active controls for one another: if the effects were driven mainly 

by generic stimulation -related factors, similar patterns would be expected across hemispheres. Instead, 

we observed significantly differing effects in the left and right stimulation groups, which supports 

functional specificity. Second, although EEG -cap –bas ed targeting does not offer the spatial precision of 

neuronavigation, it is widely used and has been shown to produce reliable behaviour al modulation 64 .

Importantly, any residual spatial variability would be expected to reduce sensitivity rather than 

systematically produce condition -specific or opposing effects 65 . Finally, the same stimulation protocol 

that modulated statistical learning did not influence episodic memory performance, and Bayesian 

analyses provided evidence in favor of the null effect in that domain. Together, these considerations 

suggest that whil e future studies using complementary targeting and sham approaches would further 

strengthen confidence in the anatomical specificity of the effect, the present results are unlikely to be 

attributable to non -specific stimulation or targeting imprecision. 

In summary, our study provides novel causal evidence for a right -lateralized role of the DLPFC in 

modulating statistical learning. These findings offer support for the competition theory by demonstrating 

that DLPFC -mediated functions, particularly those lo calized to the right hemisphere, can suppress 

model -free learning processes. Notably, our results do not support the interpretation that this effect arises 

from reduced interference by episodic memory systems. Instead, they suggest that, if such a gating 

mechanism exists, it operates independently of episodic retrieval. It raises the possibility of a long -term 

memory gating mechanism specifically for unsupervised statistical information. Furthermore, we 

propose an alternative account in which DLPFC inhibiti on alters information sampling strategies, 

promoting a broader, more exploratory mode of learning. The observed increase in RT variability, 

alongside the hemispheric specificity of the effects, supports this view and highlights a potential 

modality -depende nt component in the prefrontal contribution to statistical learning. Future research 

should more directly investigate the mechanisms linking working memory capacity, information 

sampling style, and statistical learning. Our study provides insight and propo ses novel hypotheses that 

will be critical for advancing our understanding of the DLPFC’s interaction with statistical learning 

across both typical and altered brain states. 

Materials and Methods 

Participants 

We recruited 104 healthy adults to our experiment with normal or corrected -to -normal vision. They were 

recruited through a university course and received course credits for their participation. Inclusion criteria 

were no history of neurological or psychiat ric diagnoses and no contraindication for non -invasive brain 

stimulation (epilepsy in the participant or their first -degree relatives, metal implants in the head or neck, 

pacemaker, migraine, history of severe head injury or concussion). All of them provid ed written informed 

consent. We excluded eight participants due to technical issues, and one participant who did not return 

for the second session. Additionally, 3 participants were excluded from the PALT analysis as they did 

not finish the task on the second day due to technical issues . Thus, in the ASRT analyses, we entered the 

data of 95 participants . The experiment was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki, 

with ethical approval granted by the Ethics Committee of Eötvös Loránd Univers ity (approval number: 

2019/282). 

As detailed in the Procedure section below, participants were randomly assigned to one of four 

experimental groups: (1) active right DLPFC stimulation, (2) active left DLPFC stimulation, (3) active 

bilateral DLPFC stimulation, or (4) sham stimulation (cont rol group). Demographic information and 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.08.669288 doi: bioRxiv preprint

complex working memory (counting span, CSPAN) of the participants are shown in Table 2. There were 

no significant differences between the groups in terms of gender, age, or CSPAN performance. 

Table 2. Demographic characteristics and counting span (CSPAN) of the experimental groups. 

Group  Group comparison 

Sham  Right 

DLPFC 

Left 

DLPFC 

Bilateral 

DLPFC 

Statistics 

(χ²/H/F )

p BF 10 

Gender 

(f/m) 

21/5  18/4  18/5  18/6  0.939  0.942  0.020 

Age 

(years) 

21.85 

(SD = 

3.77) 

21.73 

(SD = 

5.74) 

21 (SD 

= 1.81) 

22.48 

(SD = 

4.13) 

1.636  0.651  0.101 

CSPAN  3.74 

(SD = 

0.97) 

3.71 

(SD = 

0.84) 

3.52 

(SD = 

0.83) 

3.86 (SD 

= 0.8 0)

0.62  0.606  0.112 

Tasks 

Alternating Serial Reaction Time Task 

To measure statistical learning, we employed the Alternating Serial Reaction Time (ASRT) task 66 . In 

this task, four black circles were displayed horizontally on a white background of the computer screen, 

with dog head stimuli appearing one at a time inside these circles (see Figure 6, panel A). Each circle 

corresponded to a specific response key (Y, C, B, M) on a Hungarian QWERTZ keyboard layout. 

Participants were instructed to press the appropriate key as quickly and accurately as possible after the 

stimulus appeared, using their index and middle fingers of both hands. The stimulus remained visible 

until the correct key was pressed, after which the next stimulus appeared following a 120 ms response -

to -stimulus interval. 

The task was organized into ~1 -minute -long blocks. Each block began with five random stimuli (for 

practice purposes), which were excluded from later analyses. Following these, an eight -element sequence 

was repeated ten times, resulting in a total of 85 tri als per block. Within this repeating sequence, every 

first element was a random stimulus, while the alternating elements followed a fixed, predetermined 

sequence (e.g., 2 –r–4–r–3–r–1–r, where numbers denoted the fixed pattern elements, and "r" represented 

a randomly selected position from the four locations). Importantly, participants were unaware of the 

embedded sequential regularity. The alternating pattern of fixed and random stimuli generated triplets -

runs of three elements formed by a fixed structure of stimulus transitions - in a sliding window manner. 

Based on the example above, triplets such as 2_X_4, 4_X_3, 3_X_1, and 1_X_2 in the above example 

(where "X" denoted the middle stimulus, regardless of whether it was a random or fixed pattern element) 

occurred with high probability, as they can be formed both by two sequence elements comprising a 

random one or two random ones comprising a sequence element, thus, their last elements could be 

predicted either from the fixed pattern or from the combination of pattern and random elements. In 

contrast, triplets like 1_X_3 or 4_X_1 were considered low -probability, as they could only occur when 

both the first and last elements were random. In total, there were 16 possible high -probability triplets and 

48 low -pr obability triplets. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.08.669288 doi: bioRxiv preprint

As a result, the last elements of high -probability triplets were more predictable, and thus responses to 

them tended to be faster and more accurate. Each high -probability triplet appeared approximately five 

times more frequently than each low -probability o ne. Specifically, high -probability triplets occurred with 

a ~4% likelihood per trial and 62.5% (16 × 4%) per block, while low -probability triplets appeared with 

~0.8% per trial and 37.5% (48 × 0.8%) per block (see Figure 6). The difference in reaction time (RT) 

and/or accuracy between the last elements of high - and low -probability triplets was taken as a behaviour al 

index of statistical learning. For analytic purposes, data were segmented into epochs, each consisting of 

5 blocks, that is, a total of 85 × 5 trials. 

Figure 6. Structure of the Alternating Serial Reaction Time Task (ASRT) A. Participants were instructed to press the button 

corresponding to the location of the stimulus (a dog’s head). The order of stimuli followed a hidden alternating pattern: eve ry 

first element was randomly selected (blue), appear ing in any of the four circles, and every second element followed a fixed 

sequence (green), referred to as the pattern element. This resulted in an eight -element alternating sequence that was repeated 

10 times within each block. B. Due to this alternating structure, certain three -element combinations of stimuli (called triplets )

occurred with different probabilities. High -probability triplets (orange) can be formed when the third stimulus follows the 

hidden pattern, and may start with either a random or a pattern element. These make up 62.5% of all triplet occurrences. In 

contrast , low -probability triplets (purple) can only occur in random -pattern -random configurations and thus represent 37.5% 

of the total. 

Paired Associate Learning Task 

The Paired Associate Learning Task (PALT), developed for the Hungarian language by Nagy et al. 67 , is 

a computerized paradigm designed to assess declarative memory and is based on the revised version of 

a task by Cohn & Moscovitch 68 . During the task, two drawings – depicting either objects or animals –

were simultaneously presented on the screen. The task consisted of several phases. In the initial learning 

phase, participants were asked to name each pair of images aloud as they appe ared sequentially, without 

any instruction to memorize them. After naming the pictures, the experimenter advanced the display to 

the next image pair. A total of 23 image pairs were shown during this phase. 

Subsequent retrieval phases involved the presentation of image pairs again, and participants were asked 

to indicate whether they had previously seen each item during the learning phase. Four possible types of 

image pairs were presented: old -old (both previ ously seen), new -new (none of the images were 

previously seen), old -new, and new -old. In cases where participants responded that both items had been 

presented before, participants were further asked to determine whether the pair had originally appeared 

tog ether (“original” order) in the learning phase or had been recombined (“rearranged” order). Although 

the images did not repeat within the retrieval phase, participants were specifically instructed to give their 

responses solely based on the learning phase. Responses were recorded by the experimenter to avoid 

confusion due to the complexity of response options, and therefore, reaction time was not measured. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.08.669288 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Unlike the original implementation by Nagy et al. 67 , in our study, participants were not informed in the 

learning phase that they would later be tested on the retrieval of the images following the naming task. 

As such, they did not expect a memory test, allowing for an incidental learning design. Additiona lly, in 

contrast to the original continuous task format, we divided the task into discrete retrieval blocks: three 

blocks during the first day and one block during the second day . Each block included eight unique image 

pairs, with no repetition across bloc ks to prevent interference with consolidation processes. 

Stimulation protocol 

rTMS was administered using a Deymed DuoMAG XT stimulator over the DLPFC, targeting Brodmann 

area 9, corresponding to the F3 and F4 positions of the international 10 –20 EEG system, which we 

located using a standard EEG cap (which has been shown to be a reasonably reliable method of 

neuronavigation 64 ). Motor thresholding was individually established for each participant, by single TMS 

pulses delivered over the participants’ right primary motor cortex (M1) as initially localized by the C4 

electrode of a 10 -20 system EEG cap. The C4 electrode location w as used as an initial anatomical 

reference point. From this location, we conducted a systematic searching procedure with small coil 

displacements to identify each individual’s motor hotspot for the right first dorsal interosseous (FDI) 

muscle. The hotspot was defined as the scalp location at which TMS elicited the largest and most reliable 

EMG responses in the resting FDI muscle. Resting motor threshold was then determined over the 

individually identified hotspot by gradually increasing stimulation intensit y until minimum stimulation 

intensity that elicited visible muscle twitches in the hand or evoked motor potentials (MEPs) with an 

amplitude of at least 100 μV. This approach ensured that motor thresholding was based on functionally 

localized motor represen tations rather than a fixed scalp location. Stimulation on the first day was applied 

at 100% of each participant’s individual resting motor threshold in the active stimulation groups. A 1 Hz 

inhibitory stimulation protocol was used, delivering 300 pulses in each stimulation run, over 5 minutes 

to either the right or left hemisphere in the active right and active left groups, respectively. In the active 

bilateral group, stimulation was applied consecutively to each hemisphere for 2.5 -2.5 minutes. In the 

sham condition, the stimulation coil was held perpendicular to the scalp (following the configuration 

described by 9), preventing effective stimulation. However, the coil was still positioned on the 

participant’s head, allowing them to believe they were receiving stimulation. This approach was used to 

control for potential placebo effects. 

Procedure 

Participants completed an online screening questionnaire designed to exclude individuals with health -

related conditions (e.g., neurological or psychiatric disorders) that would preclude participation. Only 

those meeting the inclusion criteria were enrolled in the study, which consisted of two experimental days 

held 24 hours apart. Prior to the first day , participants were randomly assigned to one of the groups 

(active left, right, bilateral DLPFC stimulation, or sham stimulation) and a counterbalanced task order, 

determining whether they would first complete the ASRT or the PALT task. This assignment remained 

fixed throughout the entire experiment for each participant. 

On Day 1, after providing written informed consent, the location of Brodmann area 9 and the M1 were 

identified using a 10 -20 system EEG cap, followed by the assessment of each participant’s resting motor 

threshold. Participants then completed a familiariza tion phase of the ASRT task (two blocks of stimuli 

without embedded sequences) and the learning phase of the PALT task, with task order determined by 

prior randomization. Participants received a 5 -minute rTMS run targeting either the right DLPFC, left 

DLPF C, or sham stimulation. In the bilateral stimulation group, 2.5 minutes of stimulation was delivered 

to each hemisphere consecutively - the order of the hemispheres was also randomized across participants. 

Immediately thereafter, participants completed the first epoch of the sequence -containing ASRT task 

(comprising five blocks, approximately five minutes in total) and the first three retrieval phases of the 

PALT task in a randomized order. This rTMS –ASRT –PALT cycle was repeated five times, with the 

order o f the ASRT and PALT tasks alternating based on the assigned condition. During the second and 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.08.669288 doi: bioRxiv preprint

fourth cycles, the PALT task was replaced with short breaks. In the second day , held 24 hours later, 

participants again completed one epoch of the ASRT task and a retrieval phase of the PALT tasks in the 

same randomized order as on the first day . The experimental procedure is illustrated in Figure 7. To 

ensure that baseline cognitive differences between groups did not confound the results (e.g., one group 

performing better due to inherently higher cognitive capacity), we administered the CSPAN 69 , measuring 

complex working memory tasks to detect any such pre -existing group -level advantages (see Table 2). 

Figure 7. Study design. The experiment consisted of two sessions separated by a 24 -hour delay. At the beginning of the first 

session, participants were randomly assigned to one of four stimulation groups (sham, right DLPFC, left DLPFC, bilateral 

DLPFC). Task order was also randomized: each participant was assigned to b egin the session with either the ASRT task or 

the PALT task, and this order was kept consistent throughout all subsequent blocks. Following this, participants completed a 

familiarization phase of the ASRT task (which was two blocks of randomized trials, fo llowing no sequence) and the learning 

phase of the PALT task. These were followed by the first rTMS stimulation (1 Hz, 5 minutes, at 100% of the participant’s 

individual motor threshold). Stimulation was applied to the assigned site: for bilateral stimulat ion, 2.5 minutes were applied 

to each hemisphere. After the first stimulation, five blocks of task performance alternated with five stimulation runs . Notably, 

only the ASRT task was administered following the second and fourth stimulation blocks. In total, participants completed 

five task –stimulation cycles during the first day only . After a 24 -hour delay, participants returned for the second session, 

during which they completed a sixth epoch of the ASRT task and the retrieval phase of the PALT task without stimulation .

Statistical analysis 

All statistical analyses were conducted in RStudio (Version 2024.12.0) or JASP (Version 0.19.3) 70,71 .

Linear mixed -effects models were fitted using the mixed function from the afex package 72 . We used the 

default method (Kenward -Roger) to approximate degrees of freedom for fixed effects in all models. Post -

hoc contrasts were computed using the emmeans package 73 , using Tukey correction for multiple 

comparisons. All figures and data preprocessing were conducted in Python (Version 3.13) using the 

pandas 74 , numpy 75 , os , io 76 , seaborn 77 , and matplotlib 78 libraries. In all analyses, we determined an alpha 

level of 0.05. 

Trials were categorized into high - and low -probability in a sliding window manner based on whether 

they were the last element of a high - or a low -probability triplet (henceforth simply referred to as high -

and low -probability triplets). We excluded the fir st five trials of each block as they were random and 

served as practice trials, and trials that were the last element of repetitions (e.g., 1 -1-1, 2 -2-2) or trills 

(e.g., 1 -2-1, 2 -3-2), as participants may show a pre -existing tendency of faster motor respo nses to such 

occurrences 43 . Furthermore, from the analyses of RT, inaccurate trials were excluded. 

To investigate group differences in statistical learning on RTs, we conducted a linear mixed -

effect model to analyze RTs as a continuous outcome variable and a generalized linear mixed model to 

analyze accuracy, with responses coded as 0 (incorrect) and 1 (correct). The fixed effects included Epoch 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.08.669288 doi: bioRxiv preprint

(1 –6), Triplet Type (high - vs. low -probability), Group (sham, right, left, and bilateral stimulation groups), 

and their interactions. The models allowed for participant -specific intercepts and correlated slopes for 

within -subject variables. We used a top -down approach in model selection, starting from the most 

complex model (allowing for participant -specific intercept and correlated slopes for the interaction of 

within -subject variables) and simplified it gradually until we got a converging model. The fixed effects 

of the generalized linear mixed model were tested using Type III Wald chi -square tests with the anova() 

function from the car package. In addition, full model coefficients, including all interaction terms, are 

reported using the tab_model() function from the sjPlot package 79 .

To compare the groups in episodic retrieval performance, we conducted mixed -design analyses 

of variance (ANOVAs), as all linear mixed -effects models failed to converge on these data. We used 

Epoch (four levels) as the within -subject factor and Group (sham , right, left, and bilateral stimulation 

groups) as the between -subject factor. We ran three ANOVAs, as three scores were derived from 

participants’ responses. Item memory was calculated by subtracting the false alarm rate (incorrect Old –

Old responses to N ew –New pairs) from the hit rate for rearranged Old –Old pairs. The association 

learning index was defined as the difference between the hit rate for original and rearranged Old –Old 

pairs. The recollection index was computed by subtracting the false alarm ra te (incorrect original 

responses to rearranged Old –Old pairs) from the hit rate for original Old –Old pairs. Prior to the analysis, 

we tested whether the assumptions of the ANOVA were met. Specifically, the assumption of sphericity 

was assessed using Mauchl y’s test, and normality was evaluated using Q –Q plots. When the assumption 

of sphericity was violated, the Greenhouse –Geisser correction was applied to adjust the degrees of 

freedom. To test null effects, we applied Bayesian mixed -design ANOVAs on the PALT scores. The 

Bayes Factor 10 (BF 10 ) was calculated using JASP to compare the null and alternative hypotheses. Null 

models included the subject variable and random slopes. Based on the BF10 values, we calculated BF incl 

values across matched models. BF incl va lues indicate the likeliness of a model that does include the given 

effect vs. the one that does not. The BF incl values above one support the inclusion of the factor in the 

model, while values below one support the exclusion 80 . These values can be interpreted similarly to the 

BF 10 scores: following the interpretation guidelines by Wagenmakers et al. 81 , values around 1 indicate 

no substantial evidence for either hypothesis. BF incl values between 1 and 3 indicate anecdotal evidence 

for H₁, while values between 3 and 10 suggest moderate evidence. Conversely, values between 0.33 and 

1 indicate anecdotal evidence for H₀, and values between 0.1 and 0.33 suggest moderate support for H₀. 

A BF incl below 0.1 is considered strong evidence in favor of the null hypothesis, indicating that the groups 

likely do not differ. 

Lastly, we performed some exploratory analysis that may help us understand our results more. First, as 

an indicator of exploratory behaviour in the task, we tested the RT variability on the ASRT task by 

conducting a Levene’s test, using Group as the indepe ndent variable. Post hoc analyses were corrected 

for multiple comparisons using the Holm method. In addition, as working memory is a relevant factor in 

the DLPFC -statistical learning relationship 21 , we investigated whether working memory capacity is 

related to statistical learning performance. We ran a correlation between total learning score (calculated 

as the difference between high - and low -probability triplets across all sequential epochs) and b aseline 

counting span scores, using Pearson’s correlation. Please note that these analyses were exploratory and 

not part of our predetermined analysis plan, and they serve to further explain the results of the main 

analyses; for justification, see the Disc ussion section. 

Acknowledgments   

> This work was supported by the French National Grant Agency (ANR -22 -CPJ1 -0042 -01 and ANR -24 -CE37 -5807); the
> National Brain Research Program project NAP2022 -I-2/2022; and the Hungarian Scientific Research Fund (NKFIH 153150)
> (all awarded to D.N.). Supported by the EKÖP -25 University Excellence Scholarship Program of the Ministry for Culture and
> Innovation from the source of the National Research, Development, and Innovation Fund (EKÖP -25 -3-I-ELTE -349, to ZVP).
> The Authors thank Dóra Osztén yi, Noémi Papp, and Ádám Bicski for their work in the data collection.
> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.08.669288 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Data availability statement 

Data and codes for analysis are available on the following link: 

https://osf.io/e2rzs/?view_only=88125069a7ad418f804374378bacc441 , DOI 10.17605/OSF.IO/E2RZS 

Declaration of interests 

The authors declare no conflicts of interests. 

Declaration of Generative AI and AI -assisted technologies in the writing process 

During the preparation of this work the authors used ChatGPT (GPT -5 models) in order to correct 

grammatical and stylistic mistakes , and to add documentation to the analysis code files . After using this 

tool/service, the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the 

content of the publication. 

References 

1. Poldrack, R. A. & Packard, M. G. Competition among multiple memory systems: converging 

evidence from animal and human brain studies.  Neuropsychologia  41 , 245 –251 (2003). 

2.  Borragán, G., Slama, H., Destrebecqz, A. & Peigneux, P. Cognitive Fatigue Facilitates Procedural 

Sequence Learning.  Front. Hum. Neurosci. 10 , (2016). 

3. Zhong, L. et al. Unsupervised pretraining in biological neural networks. Nature 644 , 741 –748 

(2025). 

4. Thompson -Schill, S. L., Ramscar, M. & Chrysikou, E. G. Cognition Without Control: When a 

Little Frontal Lobe Goes a Long Way. Curr Dir Psychol Sci 18 , 259 –263 (2009). 

5. Sherman, B. E. & Turk -Browne, N. B. Statistical prediction of the future impairs episodic encoding 

of the present. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 117 , 22760 –22770 (2020). 

6. Daw, N. D., Niv, Y. & Dayan, P. Uncertainty -based competition between prefrontal and 

dorsolateral striatal systems for behavioral control. Nature Neuroscience 8, 1704 –1711 (2005). 

7. Virag, M. et al. Competition between frontal lobe functions and implicit sequence learning: 

evidence from the long -term effects of alcohol. Exp Brain Res 233 , 2081 –2089 (2015). 

8. Pedraza, F. et al. Evidence for a competitive relationship between executive functions and 

statistical learning. npj Sci. Learn. 9, 30 (2024). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.08.669288 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9. Ambrus, G. G. et al. When less is more: Enhanced statistical learning of non -adjacent dependencies 

after disruption of bilateral DLPFC. Journal of Memory and Language 114 , 104144 (2020). 

10. Tóth -Fáber, E., Nemeth, D. & Janacsek, K. Lifespan developmental invariance in memory 

consolidation: evidence from procedural memory. PNAS Nexus 2, pgad037 (2023). 

11. Nemeth, D., Janacsek, K. & Fiser, J. Age -dependent and coordinated shift in performance between 

implicit and explicit skill learning. Front. Comput. Neurosci. 7, (2013). 

12. Juhasz, D., Nemeth, D. & Janacsek, K. Is there more room to improve? The lifespan trajectory of 

procedural learning and its relationship to the between - and within -group differences in average 

response times. PLoS ONE 14 , e0215116 (2019). 

13. Nemeth, D., Janacsek, K., Polner, B. & Kovacs, Z. A. Boosting Human Learning by Hypnosis. 

Cerebral Cortex 23 , 801 –805 (2013). 

14. Smalle, E. H. M., Muylle, M., Duyck, W. & Szmalec, A. Less is more: Depleting cognitive 

resources enhances language learning abilities in adults. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 

General 150 , 2423 –2434 (2021). 

15. Smalle, E. H. M., Daikoku, T., Szmalec, A., Duyck, W. & Möttönen, R. Unlocking adults’ implicit 

statistical learning by cognitive depletion. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 119 , e2026011119 (2022). 

16. Szücs -Bencze, L. et al. Enhancing retrieval capacity of the predictive brain through dorsolateral 

prefrontal cortex intervention. Cerebral Cortex 35 , bhaf005 (2025). 

17. Janacsek, K., Ambrus, G. G., Paulus, W., Antal, A. & Nemeth, D. Right Hemisphere Advantage in 

Statistical Learning: Evidence From a Probabilistic Sequence Learning Task. Brain Stimulation 8,

277 –282 (2015). 

18. Roser, M. E., Fiser, J., Aslin, R. N. & Gazzaniga, M. S. Right Hemisphere Dominance in Visual 

Statistical Learning. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 23 , 1088 –1099 (2010). 

19. Wolford, G., Miller, M. B. & Gazzaniga, M. The left hemisphere’s role in hypothesis formation. 

The Journal of Neuroscience 20 , RC64 (2000). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.08.669288 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20. Greeley, B. & Seidler, R. D. Differential effects of left and right prefrontal cortex anodal 

transcranial direct current stimulation during probabilistic sequence learning. Journal of 

Neurophysiology 121 , 1906 –1916 (2019). 

21. Smittenaar, P., FitzGerald, T. H. B., Romei, V., Wright, N. D. & Dolan, R. J. Disruption of 

Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex Decreases Model -Based in Favor of Model -free Control in Humans. 

Neuron 80 , 914 –919 (2013). 

22. Galea, J. M., Albert, N. B., Ditye, T. & Miall, R. C. Disruption of the Dorsolateral Prefrontal 

Cortex Facilitates the Consolidation of Procedural Skills. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 22 ,

1158 –1164 (2009). 

23. Savic, B., Cazzoli, D., Müri, R. & Meier, B. No effects of transcranial DLPFC stimulation on 

implicit task sequence learning and consolidation. Sci Rep 7, 9649 (2017). 

24. Savic, B., Müri, R. & Meier, B. High Definition Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation Does Not 

Modulate Implicit Task Sequence Learning and Consolidation. Neuroscience 414 , 77 –87 (2019). 

25. Balconi, M. Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, working memory and episodic memory processes: 

insight through transcranial magnetic stimulation techniques. Neurosci. Bull. 29 , 381 –389 (2013). 

26. Ruchkin, D. S., Grafman, J., Cameron, K. & Berndt, R. S. Working memory retention systems: A 

state of activated long -term memory. Behav Brain Sci 26 , 709 –728 (2003). 

27. Habib, R., Nyberg, L. & Tulving, E. Hemispheric asymmetries of memory: the HERA model 

revisited. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 7, 241 –245 (2003). 

28. Tulving, E., Kapur, S., Craik, F. I., Moscovitch, M. & Houle, S. Hemispheric encoding/retrieval 

asymmetry in episodic memory: positron emission tomography findings. PNAS 91 , 2016 –2020 

(1994). 

29. Smalle, E. H. M., Panouilleres, M., Szmalec, A. & Möttönen, R. Language learning in the adult 

brain: disrupting the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex facilitates word -form learning. Sci Rep 7, 13966 

(2017). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.08.669288 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30. Filoteo, J. V., Lauritzen, S. & Maddox, W. T. Removing the Frontal Lobes: The Effects of 

Engaging Executive Functions on Perceptual Category Learning. Psychol Sci 21 , 415 –423 (2010). 

31. Tóth, B. et al. Dynamics of EEG functional connectivity during statistical learning. Neurobiology 

of Learning and Memory 144 , 216 –229 (2017). 

32. Park, J., Janacsek, K., Nemeth, D. & Jeon, H. -A. Reduced functional connectivity supports 

statistical learning of temporally distributed regularities. NeuroImage 260 , 119459 (2022). 

33. Zwart, F. S., Vissers, C. Th. W. M., Kessels, R. P. C. & Maes, J. H. R. Procedural learning across 

the lifespan: A systematic review with implications for atypical development. Journal of 

Neuropsychology 13 , 149 –182 (2019). 

34. Smith, E. E. et al. Spatial versus Object Working Memory: PET Investigations. Journal of 

Cognitive Neuroscience 7, 337 –356 (1995). 

35. Wager, T., Insler, R. & Smith, E. The neural bases of distracter -resistant working memory.  Nat 

Prec  https://doi.org/10.1038/npre.2011.5526.1 (2011) doi:10.1038/npre.2011.5526.1. 

36.  Frank, S. M.  et al.  Fundamental Differences in Visual Perceptual Learning between Children and 

Adults. Current Biology 31 , 427 -432.e5 (2021). 

37. Divjak, D. & Milin, P. Exploring and Exploiting Uncertainty: Statistical Learning Ability Affects 

How We Learn to Process Language Along Multiple Dimensions of Experience. Cognitive Science 

44 , e12835 (2020). 

38. Pesthy, O. et al. Intact predictive processing in autistic adults: evidence from statistical learning. 

Sci Rep 13 , 11873 (2023). 

39. Wilson, R. C., Bonawitz, E., Costa, V. D. & Ebitz, R. B. Balancing exploration and exploitation 

with information and randomization. Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 38 , 49 –56 (2021). 

40. Feng, S. F., Wang, S., Zarnescu, S. & Wilson, R. C. The dynamics of explore –exploit decisions 

reveal a signal -to -noise mechanism for random exploration. Sci Rep 11 , 3077 (2021). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.08.669288 doi: bioRxiv preprint

41. Wu, C. M., Schulz, E., Pleskac, T. J. & Speekenbrink, M. Time pressure changes how people 

explore and respond to uncertainty. Sci Rep 12 , 4122 (2022). 

42. Oberauer, K. Working Memory and Attention – A Conceptual Analysis and Review. Journal of 

Cognition 2, 36 (2019). 

43. Olivers, C. N., Meijer, F. & Theeuwes, J. Feature -based memory -driven attentional capture: visual 

working memory content affects visual attention. Journal of experimental psychology: human 

perception and performance 32 , 1243 (2006). 

44. Jonides, J. et al. Spatial working memory in humans as revealed by PET. Nature 363 , 623 –625 

(1993). 

45. Dickey, C. W. et al. Transcranial magnetic stimulation to the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex 

modulates single -neuron activity in humans. Preprint at 

https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.15.711839 (2026). 

46. Fried, P. J., Rushmore, R. J., Moss, M. B., Valero ‐Cabré, A. & Pascual ‐Leone, A. Causal evidence 

supporting functional dissociation of verbal and spatial working memory in the human dorsolateral 

prefrontal cortex. Eur J of Neuroscience 39 , 1973 –1981 (2014). 

47. Lycke, C., Specht, K., Ersland, L. & Hugdahl, K. An fMRI study of phonological and spatial 

working memory using identical stimuli. Scandinavian J Psychology 49 , 393 –401 (2008). 

48. Reuter -Lorenz, P. A. et al. Age Differences in the Frontal Lateralization of Verbal and Spatial 

Working Memory Revealed by PET. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 12 , 174 –187 (2000). 

49. Smith, E. E., Jonides, J. & Koeppe, R. A. Dissociating Verbal and Spatial Working Memory Using 

PET. Cerebral Cortex 6, 11 –20 (1996). 

50. Wan, Q. & Sloutsky, V. M. Working memory shapes information sampling and attention allocation 

across development. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 155 , 479 –498 (2026). 

51. Hayden, B. Y., Heilbronner, S. R. & Yoo, S. B. M. Rethinking the centrality of brain areas in 

understanding functional organization. Nat Neurosci 29 , 267 –278 (2026). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.08.669288 doi: bioRxiv preprint

52. Rosen, M. C. & Freedman, D. J. How distributed is the brain -wide network that is recruited for 

cognition? Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 27 , 138 –150 (2026). 

53. Sandrini, M., Cappa, S. F., Rossi, S., Rossini, P. M. & Miniussi, C. The Role of Prefrontal Cortex 

in Verbal Episodic Memory: rTMS Evidence. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 15 , 855 –861 

(2003). 

54. Arabacı, G., Cakir, B. S. & Parris, B. A. The effect of high -frequency rTMS over left DLPFC and 

fluid abilities on goal neglect. Brain Struct Funct 229 , 1073 –1086 (2024). 

55. Cui, H. et al. A novel dual -site OFC -dlPFC accelerated repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation 

for depression: a pilot randomized controlled study. Psychol. Med. 54 , 3849 –3862 (2024). 

56. Izuma, K. et al. A Causal Role for Posterior Medial Frontal Cortex in Choice -Induced Preference 

Change. J. Neurosci. 35 , 3598 –3606 (2015). 

57. Kim, L., Chun, M. H., Kim, B. R. & Lee, S. J. Effect of Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic 

Stimulation on Patients with Brain Injury and Dysphagia. Ann Rehabil Med 35 , 765 (2011). 

58. Kurkin, S. et al. Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation of the Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex Increases 

Posterior Theta Rhythm and Reduces Latency of Motor Imagery. Sensors 23 , 4661 (2023). 

59. Schluter, R. S., Van Holst, R. J. & Goudriaan, A. E. Effects of Ten Sessions of High Frequency 

Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (HF -rTMS) Add -on Treatment on Impulsivity in 

Alcohol Use Disorder. Front. Neurosci. 13 , 1257 (2019). 

60. Shang, Y. et al. Theta -burst transcranial magnetic stimulation induced functional connectivity 

changes between dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and default -mode -network. Brain Imaging and 

Behavior 14 , 1955 –1963 (2020). 

61. Sun, T. & Yu, Q. Effects of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation on upper extremity motor 

function in stroke survivors: study protocol of a randomized sham -controlled trial. Front. Neurol. 

16 , 1669862 (2026). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.08.669288 doi: bioRxiv preprint

62. Vanderhasselt, M. -A., De Raedt, R., Baeken, C., Leyman, L. & D’haenen, H. The influence of 

rTMS over the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex on Stroop task performance. Exp Brain Res 169 ,

279 –282 (2006). 

63. Caulfield, K. A. et al. Neuronavigation maximizes accuracy and precision in TMS positioning: 

Evidence from 11,230 distance, angle, and electric field modeling measurements. Brain 

Stimulation 15 , 1192 –1205 (2022). 

64. Herwig, U., Satrapi, P. & Schönfeldt -Lecuona, C. Using the International 10 -20 EEG System for 

Positioning of Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation. Brain Topogr 16 , 95 –99 (2003). 

65. Hebel, T. et al. A direct comparison of neuronavigated and non -neuronavigated intermittent theta 

burst stimulation in the treatment of depression. Brain Stimulation 14 , 335 –343 (2021). 

66. Howard, J. H. & Howard, D. V. Age differences in implicit learning of higher order dependencies 

in serial patterns. Psychology and Aging 12 , 634 –656 (1997). 

67. Nagy M., Kónya A. & Király I. Az Asszociatív Emlékezet Fejlődése 6 –10 Éves Kor És Fiatal 

Felnőttkor Között. Pszichológia 33 , 169 –184 (2013). 

68. Cohn, M. & Moscovitch, M. Dissociating measures of associative memory: Evidence and 

theoretical implications. Journal of Memory and Language 57 , 437 –454 (2007). 

69. Case, R., Kurland, D. M. & Goldberg, J. Operational efficiency and the growth of short -term 

memory span. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 33 , 386 –404 (1982). 

70. JASP Team. JASP (Version 0.18.3)[Computer software]. (2024). 

71. RStudio: Integrated Development Environment for R. RStudio Team (2015). 

72. Singmann, H. et al. afex: Analysis of Factorial Experiments. (2024). 

73. Lenth, R. V. Emmeans: Estimated Marginal Means, Aka Least -Squares Means . (2024). 

74.  Reback, J.  et al.  pandas -dev/pandas: Pandas 1.0.3. Zenodo 

https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.3715232 (2020). 

75.  Harris, C. R.  et al.  Array programming with NumPy. Nature 585 , 357 –362 (2020). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 1, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.08.669288 doi: bioRxiv preprint

76. David J. H. Shih. io: A Unified Framework for Input -Output Operations in R. 0.3.2 

https://doi.org/10.32614/CRAN.package.io (2014). 

77. Waskom, M. et al. mwaskom/seaborn: v0.8.1 (September 2017). Zenodo 

https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.883859 (2017). 

78. Hunter, J. D. Matplotlib: A 2D Graphics Environment. Comput. Sci. Eng. 9, 90 –95 (2007). 

79. Lüdecke, D. sjPlot: Data Visualization for Statistics in Social Science. 2.9.0 

https://doi.org/10.32614/CRAN.package.sjPlot (2013). 

80. Peter Rosenfeld, J. & Olson, J. M. Bayesian Data Analysis: A Fresh Approach to Power Issues and 

Null Hypothesis Interpretation. Appl Psychophysiol Biofeedback 46 , 135 –140 (2021). 

81. Wagenmakers, E. -J., Wetzels, R., Borsboom, D. & Van Der Maas, H. L. J. Why psychologists 

must change the way they analyze their data: The case of psi: Comment on Bem (2011). Journal of 

Personality and Social Psychology 100 , 426 –432 (2011).