Title: Inter-hemispheric connections modulate splitting in a computational model of the bilateral SCN

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.04.30.722022v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
Inter-hemispheric connections modulate splitting in a computational model of the bilateral SCN 

## Running title: 

Inter-hemispheric connections modulate splitting 

## Authors: 

Klavdia Zemlianova 2 , ORCID: 0000-0002-8204-5071 

Jaden McDaniel 1 , ORCID: 0009-0008-4844-2074 

Alice G. Lander 1,3 , ORCID: 0009-0009-8923-9301 

Julu Nwaezeapu 1,2 , ORCID 0000-0001-7715-5607 

Gabrielle J. Gutierrez 1,2 , ORCID: 0000-0002-2350-1559 

1 Department of Neuroscience and Behavior, Barnard College 

2 Center for Theoretical Neuroscience, Zuckerman Institute, Columbia University 

3 Biology Department and Volen Center, Brandeis University 

Corresponding author: 

Gabrielle J. Gutierrez 

Address: 3009 Broadway, New York, NY 10027 

Office phone: 212-853-3840 

Email: ggutierr@barnard.edu 

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.30.722022 doi: bioRxiv preprint Abstract 

The phenomenon of splitting was originally observed in hamsters which, after prolonged exposure to constant light, exhibit two rest/wake cycles within a subjective day. Splitting is a consequence of the left and right suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) falling out of synchrony. While it is known that split activity is characterized by an antiphase relationship between the left and right SCN and between the core and shell within each hemisphere, the role of the commissural projections that connect the right and left SCN is not known. In the present study, we investigate the impact of the inter-hemispheric connections on the split and unsplit dynamics of a computational model of the bilateral SCN. Our model has 4 nodes corresponding to each right and left core and shell. We simulated our bilateral model under different lighting conditions and measured its period and the phase relationships among the 4 nodes. To further characterize the dynamics of the system, we performed a bifurcation analysis. We found that the bilateral model automatically splits unless entrained by bright light/dark cycles, or unless it has excitatory inter-hemispheric connections. This suggests that excitatory cross-connections may be important for freerunning behavior. We found that constant light of varying intensities transitions the model between split and unsplit activity only in very limited conditions, but the strength and polarity of the contralateral connections play a much greater role in this dynamical transition. These findings suggest that splitting may involve plasticity of the inter-hemispheric connections of the SCN. 

## Keywords 

Circadian rhythm, split rhythm, bifurcation, gated pacemaker, light intensity, excitation, inhibition, commissural connections, contralateral projections 

# Introduction 

## Anatomy and physiology of the SCN 

The suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) consists of a small cluster of neurons in the mammalian hypothalamus which serves as a central pacemaker that controls and regulates the body’s circadian rhythms (Hastings et al., 2018). The SCN synchronizes internal biological clocks with environmental cues such as light and temperature, facilitating an adaptive response to the 24 hour day-night cycle (Majercak et al., 1999). The generation and maintenance of these rhythmic patterns of neural activity influence various physiological processes including, sleep-wake cycles, hormone secretion, body temperature, and feeding behavior (Dibner et al., 2010; Guenthner et al., 2014; Merrow and Harrington, 2020). 

The SCN is a bi-hemispheric structure with each side containing approximately 10,000 neurons (van den Pol, 1980; Hastings et al., 2018). In each hemisphere, the SCN can be divided into two distinct regions (Card et al., 1981; Moore et al., 2002). The ventrocaudal region (core) receives direct retinal input via the retinohypothalamic tract (RHT) and does not exhibit detectable rhythms in clock gene expression and electrical activity (Moore et al., 1995; Berson et 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.30.722022 doi: bioRxiv preprint

al., 2002; Antle et al., 2009; Paul et al., 2009). In contrast, the dorsal region (shell), is populated with cells that exhibit strong circadian rhythms in both clock genes and clock-controlled genes, despite the lack of direct retinal input (Colwell, 2011). Individual SCN neurons are capable of generating circadian rhythms in electrical activity as seen in vivo, in SCN tissue cultures, and in brain slice preparations (Meijer et al., 1998; Yan et al., 2005; Maywood et al., 2006; Nakamura et al., 2008; Webb et al., 2009; Bano-Otalora et al., 2021). These rhythms can be sustained in darkness and can even be recovered by transplantation of a grafted SCN into a host (Silver et al., 1996). 

The connectivity within the SCN and among its constituent regions is responsible for synchronized circadian activity (Antle and Silver, 2005; Maywood et al., 2006). SCN neurons are highly interconnected through both synaptic and peptidergic signaling (Colwell, 2011; Hastings et al., 2018). GABA is released by nearly all SCN neurons and mediates inhibition as well as excitation depending on the postsynaptic response (Farajnia et al., 2014; Albers et al., 2017; Hastings et al., 2018). The core contains neurons that express vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) and neurons that express gastrin-releasing peptide (GRP), while the shell contains vasopressin (AVP)-expressing neurons (Antle and Silver, 2005; Colwell, 2011; Hastings et al., 2018). The core sends projections to the shell, and although there is little evidence for shell to core projections in rodent SCN, commissural fibers connecting the left and right cores and the left and right shells have been observed (van den Pol, 1980; Card et al., 1981; Pickard, 1982; Leak et al., 1999; Abrahamson and Moore, 2001; Moore et al., 2002). The commissural connections are thought to be mediated by glutamate in the mouse (Michel et al., 2013). While these commissural projections connecting the left and right hemispheres of the SCN have been observed in multiple studies, the function that such inter-hemisphere connections serve is not well established. 

## Split rhythms 

The clock system exhibits remarkable flexibility in response to specific environment conditions. The golden hamster, M. auratus, is a nocturnal creature with bouts of rest/wake activity that follow a circadian period of approximately 24 hours. Under conditions of constant darkness, the hamster’s circadian rhythms free-run as they maintain behavioral rhythmicity (Rusak, 1977). However, when exposed to constant light for prolonged periods of several days to several weeks, hamsters display a unique phenomenon called “splitting” (Pittendrigh, 1960a; Pittendrigh and Daan, 1976; Pickard and Turek, 1982). Splitting refers to the divergence of an organism's activity patterns, creating two distinct components within a 24-hour period (Welsh et al., 2010). Effectively, the split animal experiences transitions from rest to wakefulness at about twice the frequency as in free-running. Splitting can occur in dim light, but the likelihood of transitioning to splitting is dependent on the intensity of the constant light, with brighter constant light increasing the likelihood of splitting (Pickard et al., 1993). The period of circadian rhythms lengthens as light intensity increases, and animals with longer free-running periods are more likely to exhibit splitting (Pickard et al., 1993). The amount of wheel-running activity influences the latency to split where more active hamsters have a shorter latency for transitioning to the split rhythm (Butler et al., 2012). 

The critical role of the SCN in circadian regulation is demonstrated by studies where lesions to the SCN of hamsters resulted in abolishment of the splitting behavior. Unilateral 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.30.722022 doi: bioRxiv preprint

damage to the SCN in split hamsters restores the unsplit rhythm (Pickard and Turek, 1982). Bilateral and unilateral lesions to areas surrounding the SCN can also abolish the split rhythm, demonstrating that split behavior is sensitive to the interactions within a complex system that extends beyond the SCN (Harrington et al., 1990). 

The gradual divergence of the 24-hour rest/wake rhythm into a split rhythm led researchers to hypothesize that there are two components to the clock that may synchronize either in unison or alternately (Pittendrigh, 1960a; Pittendrigh and Daan, 1976; Rusak, 1977; Evans and Schwartz, 2024). Indeed, the extinction of the split rhythm after unilateral lesions to the SCN lent support to that idea (Pickard and Turek, 1982), and later it was observed that split hamsters have asymmetric expression of period genes between the left and right SCN (de la Iglesia et al., 2000). Per1 and Bmal1 are normally expressed symmetrically across the left and right SCN while alternating during a 24-hour period. In the split hamster, Per1 expression was observed unilaterally while Bmal1 expression was simultaneously found in the contralateral SCN, indicating an antiphase relationship between the left and right SCNs of split animals (de la Iglesia et al., 2000). The physiology of the split SCN was further refined by studies showing an antiphase relationship for Per1 expression in the core and shell (Yan et al., 2005). c-FOS expression is also in antiphase between the core and shell of the split animal, demonstrating a correlation between electrical activity and clock gene expression (Tavakoli-Nezhad and Schwartz, 2005; Yan et al., 2005; Butler et al., 2012). Each SCN hemisphere of the split animal individually exhibits a 24-hour rhythm but each hemisphere is in antiphase with the other, leading to the 12-hour rest/wake cycles that characterize the split behavior. Extra-SCN regions, on the other hand, exhibit in-phase 12-hour rhythms in correspondence with the behavior (Butler et al., 2012). 

## Modeling the SCN and split rhythms 

The phenomenon of splitting in hamsters has prompted researchers to explore the existence of two distinct oscillators governing circadian rhythms, rather than a single oscillator, in mathematical models of the SCN (Daan and Berde, 1978; Kawato and Suzuki, 1980). While several variations of mathematical and computational models of splitting exist, examining the physiology of the split SCN requires a model that captures the antiphase relationship between the left and right hemispheres while also embodying the antiphase activity between the core and shell within a hemisphere. In the present study, we create a computational model that can simulate the dually antiphase activity observed in recent studies (Yan et al., 2005; Butler et al., 2012), which we term the 4-node split. 

Despite the growing body of literature, significant knowledge gaps remain regarding the precise synaptic and circuit-level dynamics that facilitate splitting. To address these gaps, the present study constructs a model of the SCN from a pair of coupled gated oscillators based on the model by Carpenter and Grossberg, 1984. Our model differs from previous models by explicitly incorporating the lateralized structure of the left and right hemispheres of the SCN, allowing the simulation of the 4-node split activity and to identify critical thresholds in coupling strength that transition the model between split and unsplit activity. The results extend beyond newly hypothesized circuit mechanisms underlying split behavior; they offer insight into the broader dynamics of circadian regulation in response to environmental changes. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.30.722022 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Methods 

## Bilateral SCN model 

Our model is an extension of a classic gated pacemaker model (Carpenter and Grossberg, 1984). The original model has two nodes which are mutually coupled, forming a half-center oscillator. Each node features a gating mechanism capturing the dynamics of a neural system where the depletion of neurotransmitters reduces the effective signal transmission between nodes in the circuit. When the original model was conceived, researchers had found that there are parts of the SCN that receive retinothalamic inputs and that different parts of the SCN have distinct chemoarchitectures; however, the core and shell organization of the SCN had not yet been fully established (Moore et al., 2002). In alignment with contemporary terminology, we denote Carpenter and Grossberg's abstract chemoregional variables as core and shell. Light is received by the vcore node, simulating the retino-recipient nature of the core of the SCN. The output of the vshell node is a proxy for the animal’s activity in this model. A Fatigue signal, F,integrates the shell activity and feeds it back to the core. 

Our model innovates upon Carpenter and Grossberg’s original model by incorporating bilateral SCN nodes (Fig. 1A). Expanding the model from unilateral core and shell nodes to bilateral core and shell nodes requires four dynamical variables ( vRshell , vLshell , vRcore , vLcore ) and their corresponding gating variables ( zRshell , zLshell , zRcore , and zLcore ). The dynamical variable for Fatigue, F, integrates the mean left and right shell activity. Incorporation of distinct bilateral SCN populations enabled our investigation of splitting and the dynamics that govern the transitions between split and unsplit activity in the SCN. 

τ 𝑑𝑣 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝑅  

> 𝑑𝑡

= − 𝐴𝑣 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝑅 + (𝐵 − 𝑣 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝑅 )(𝐼 + 𝑓(𝑣 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝑅 )𝑧 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝑅 ) − (𝑣 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝑅 + 𝐶)𝑓(𝑣 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑅 ) + 𝑤 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝑓(𝑣 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝐿 )

(1) 

τ 𝑑𝑣 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝐿  

> 𝑑𝑡

= − 𝐴𝑣 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝐿 + (𝐵 − 𝑣 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝐿 )(𝐼 + 𝑓(𝑣 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝐿 )𝑧 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝐿 ) − (𝑣 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝐿 + 𝐶)𝑓(𝑣 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝐿 ) + 𝑤 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝑓(𝑣 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝑅 )

(2) 

τ 𝑑𝑣 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑅  

> 𝑑𝑡

= − 𝐴𝑣 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑅 + (𝐵 − 𝑣 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑅 )(𝐼 + 𝑓(𝑣 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑅 )𝑧 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑅 + 𝐹 + 𝐽(𝑡)) − (𝑣 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑅 + 𝐶)𝑓(𝑣 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝑅 ) + 𝑤 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑓(𝑣 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝐿 )

(3) 

τ 𝑑𝑣 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝐿  

> 𝑑𝑡

= − 𝐴𝑣 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝐿 + (𝐵 − 𝑣 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝐿 )(𝐼 + 𝑓(𝑣 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝐿 )𝑧 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝐿 + 𝐹 + 𝐽(𝑡)) − (𝑣 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝐿 + 𝐶)𝑓(𝑣 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝐿 ) + 𝑤 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑓(𝑣 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑅 )

(4) 

(5) τ 𝑑𝑧 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝑅  

> 𝑑𝑡

= 𝐷(𝐸 − 𝑧 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝑅 ) − 𝐻𝑓(𝑣 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝑅 )𝑧 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝑅 

(6) τ 𝑑𝑧 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝐿  

> 𝑑𝑡

= 𝐷(𝐸 − 𝑧 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝐿 ) − 𝐻𝑓(𝑣 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝐿 )𝑧 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝐿 

(7) τ 𝑑𝑧 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑅  

> 𝑑𝑡

= 𝐷(𝐸 − 𝑧 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑅 ) − 𝐻𝑓(𝑣 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑅 )𝑧 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝑅 

(8) τ 𝑑𝑧 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝐿  

> 𝑑𝑡

= 𝐷(𝐸 − 𝑧 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝐿 ) − 𝐻𝑓(𝑣 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝐿 )𝑧 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 𝐿 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.30.722022 doi: bioRxiv preprint

(9) τ 𝑑𝐹 𝑑𝑡 = − 𝐾𝐹 + ℎ(𝑣 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛 )

Where 

(10) 𝑓(𝑦) = 𝑚𝑎𝑥(𝑦, 0) 

(11) ℎ(𝑦) = 𝑀𝑚𝑎𝑥(ℎ *(𝑦) − ℎ *(𝑁), 0) 

(12) ℎ*(𝑦) = 𝑦 2/(𝑃 2 + 𝑦 2)

(13) 𝑣 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛 = (𝑣 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝑅 + 𝑣 𝑠ℎ𝑒𝑙𝑙 𝐿 )/2 

J(t) is the light input to the core nodes. It defaults to a constant value equal to light intensity, L, in constant light or constant dark conditions. In light/dark (LD) conditions, J(t) is a square wave signal that oscillates between 0 and L with a 50% duty cycle. 

Our model has three distinct ways of connecting the left and right hemispheres: through the shared Fatigue signal, through shell to shell coupling (w shell ), and through core to core coupling (w core ). In the default version of our model, contralateral coupling across the shells or cores is “off” (i.e. w shell = w core = 0) and the two hemispheres are connected only via the shared Fatigue signal. 

We retain most of the parameter values from Carpenter and Grossberg, 1984 (see Table). Our time constant, τ, was tuned to produce approximately 24 hour periods in constant dark (DD) for the vcore and vshell nodes in the default bilateral model without explicit inter-hemisphere connections (i.e. w shell = w core = 0). 

Table 1. Model parameters 

parameter  value  interpretation 

A 1 decay rate 𝑣 𝑖 

B 5 Maximal  𝑣 𝑖 

C 0.5  Minimal  𝑣 𝑖 

D 0.01  zi accumulation rate 

E 0.4  Maximal zi

H 0.02  zi release rate 

I 0.13  Constant arousal level 

K 0.17  F decay rate 

N 0.72  Activity threshold 

P 1 vshell value where h *(vshell ) is half-maximal 

M 0.1  F upper bound 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.30.722022 doi: bioRxiv preprint

parameter value interpretation 

τ 0.315  Time constant 

L Between 0 and 0.08  Light intensity 

wshell  Between -1 and 1  Bi-hemispheric connection strength between left and right shell nodes 

wcore  Between -0.5 and 0.25 

Bi-hemispheric connection strength between left and right core nodes 

In the gated pacemaker model, the core and shell nodes oscillate at the same frequency with a shifted phase, otherwise there are no oscillations. The gating variables generally oscillate at the same frequency as the core and shell nodes when oscillations are present. 

## Simulations 

The model was implemented and analyzed using custom-written code in Matlab, Mathematica, and XPPAUT on a Mac Powerbook Pro or a Mac Studio. Simulations of model activity time series were performed in Matlab using the built-in ODE solver for non-stiff systems (ode45) based on Runge-Kutta integration of equations 1-9. Time is in units of hours. The maximum integration step size was bounded to 10 hours (MaxStep=10). The optimal tolerances depended on the simulation length and were set to RelTol=1e-5 and AbsTol=1e-7 for the 3000 hour simulations. For shorter simulations, RelTol=1e-4 and AbsTol=1e-6 was sufficient. 

The first 500 hours of simulated time were discarded to allow the system to reach steady state. The model activity variables have arbitrary units. In all figures of model activity time series, scale bars indicate a consistent quantity across instances of the variable plotted. Zero is denoted by a small horizontal bar. 

Simulated trials of model activity were distinguished by distinct initial conditions. Initial values for each of the 9 variables were independently drawn from uniform distributions with support as follows: 

𝐶 ≤ 𝑣 ≤ 𝐵 

0 ≤ 𝑧 ≤ 𝐸 

0 ≤ 𝐹 ≤ 𝑀 

For each trial, the same initial condition was used for one sweep of the independent variable. Each combination of initial condition and independent variable value was simulated independently such that all combinations had the first 500 hours of simulated time discarded before being analyzed. The remaining 1200 hours of simulated time for each trial was analyzed (3000 hours of simulated time in the latency to switch trials). N = 100 trials, unless otherwise stated. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.30.722022 doi: bioRxiv preprint

## Analyses of model activity 

Oscillation periods were quantified using Fast Fourier Transform applied to the activity waveforms, v, of the shell and/or core nodes. The periods among the four activity waveforms were typically identical regardless of whether the system was in the split or unsplit mode. 

To quantify the relative phase between the right and left nodes, we utilized a Relative Phase Index, ɸ, as illustrated in Fig. 1B where T R is the period of signal R, and |t R - t L| is the average absolute difference between the time of peaks of signals R and L: 

ϕ = 𝑠𝑖𝑛(π |𝑡 𝑅 − 𝑡 𝐿 |𝑇 𝑅 

)

The Relative Phase Index varies between 0 and 1 such that two signals perfectly in phase will have a Relative Phase Index of 0 and two signals that are in perfect anti-phase will have a Relative Phase Index of 1. 

A bifurcation analysis was performed on the bilateral system using XPPAUT. 

# Results 

## Split activity is dependent on Fatigue coupling and light conditions 

Our model is an extension of the model by Carpenter and Grossberg (1984) with one half-center oscillator formed by two nodes. Here, we have two half-center oscillators, each one representing a hemisphere of the bilateral SCN (Fig. 1A). The behavior resulting from connecting two half-center oscillators, each with their own interconnected core and shell nodes, is not necessarily predictable and may be dependent on how they are connected. The first point of connection between the two hemispheres is the Fatigue signal, F. The Fatigue signal is a readout of the activity of the shell node and it is fed back into the core node. It represents an integration of the organism’s metabolic or locomotor activity (Carpenter and Grossberg, 1984). In our bilateral model, the Fatigue signal is the average activity of the left and right shell nodes (see eqn. 9) since having independent Fatigue signals for the right and left hemispheres of the SCN model would be difficult to justify given that the model represents the activity of one animal. The left and right core nodes thus receive identical feedback that is dependent on the combined shell activity. 

When the left and right hemispheres share a Fatigue signal, the two hemispheres exhibit synchronized split activity (Fig. 1B,C). The right and left shell nodes are in antiphase with each other and the right and left core nodes are also in antiphase with each other. The right shell oscillates in phase with the left core, and the left shell oscillates in phase with the right core. The split activity emerges immediately when the right and left hemispheres are connected by a shared Fatigue signal under constant dark conditions (light intensity = 0), and it is robust to different initial conditions. We next asked what conditions can produce unsplit activity in the bilateral SCN model. 

A B

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.30.722022 doi: bioRxiv preprint

C

Figure 1. Bilateral SCN model produces splitting activity. 

A. Circuit schematic of bilateral SCN model showing the four activity nodes ( vRshell , vLshell , vRcore ,and vLcore ) and their connectivity. Fatigue is a readout of the vRshell and vLshell nodes. Light and Fatigue are inputs to the vRcore and vLcore nodes. 

B. Bilateral SCN model in split mode under constant dark conditions (L = 0). The two hemispheres are connected only by a shared Fatigue signal that enters the vRcore and vLcore 

nodes. Units on y-axes are arbitrary. The calculation of Relative Phase Index (RPI) is illustrated by annotations on the vshell traces (top panel). 

C. Schematic of split (bottom) and unsplit (middle) activity over the course of subjective day/night cycles (top). Adapted from (Butler et al., 2012). 

When we drive the model with 24-hour light/dark cycles where a 12-hour pulse of light is followed by a 12-hour period of darkness, we observe the unsplit mode where the left and right shell oscillate in phase, and the left and right core oscillate in phase, while the core and shell oscillate in antiphase within their respective hemisphere (Fig. 2A). These results depend on the intensity of the light pulses: higher intensity pulses are better able to entrain the model to the unsplit mode (Fig. 2B, bottom panel). Lower light intensities (L < 0.04) produce phase-shifted or split rhythms. The period of oscillations follow the 24-hour period of the light/dark cycles regardless of whether the model is split or unsplit in these lighting conditions (Fig. 2B, top panel). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.30.722022 doi: bioRxiv preprint

A B

Figure 2. Model entrains to L/D cycles but only settles into unsplit activity for higher light intensities (>0.04). The two hemispheres are connected only by a shared Fatigue signal that enters the right and left core nodes ( vRcore and vLcore ). 

A.  The activity traces over time for the model entrained by light/dark cycles (light intensity, L =0.05). Gray highlights indicate dark periods. The hamster is a nocturnal animal and the shell nodes, vRshell and vLshell , are most active during the night. 

B.  Period of vRshell maintains the period of the 24-hour light/dark cycles (top). The relative phase between the vRshell and vLshell nodes is dependent on the light intensity of the light/dark cycles (bottom). Each point is a trial. There were 100 trials for each light intensity value, L (0.01, 0.03, 0.05, 0.07). Horizontal magenta bars denote the mean, vertical magenta bars denote the standard deviation. 

At intermediate light intensities (L = 0.03), the relative phase is somewhat sensitive to the initial conditions (Fig. 2B, bottom panel) and there does not appear to be a stable split or unsplit regime. In contrast, the relative phase index is not sensitive to initial conditions when light intensity is low (L = 0.01), and the split mode is stable. When light intensity is high (L = 0.05, 0.07), the relative phase index is once again insensitive to initial conditions but the unsplit mode is stable. Therefore, light intensity may be a bifurcation variable whose adjustment could change the dynamics of the system. 

In the classical splitting experiments, hamsters transitioned into split behavior after being kept in constant light conditions. We therefore next investigated the effect of driving the system by constant light of fixed intensity (Fig. 3). We found that the split mode was generally dominant across constant light conditions of different intensities. The exception to this was observed at light intensities in the middle range (0.03 through 0.06) where the relative phases were not consistent across trials – indicating sensitivity to initial conditions (Fig. 3 bottom). 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.30.722022 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Indeed, some trials in the mid-intensity range resulted in unsplit activity with the period also decreasing to approximately 18-hours. Apart from this behavior in the mid light intensities, the oscillation period increased with increasing light intensities (Fig. 3 top). 

Figure 3. Period of vRshell (top) and relative phase between the vRshell and vLshell nodes (bottom) in simulations of the model in constant light conditions. The two hemispheres are connected only by a shared Fatigue signal that enters the vRcore and vLcore nodes. Note that we have D/D conditions when light intensity is zero. Each point is a trial. There were 100 trials for each light intensity value, L (0, 0.01, 0.02, 0.03, 0.04, 0.05, 0.06, 0.07). Horizontal magenta bars denote the mean, vertical magenta bars denote the standard deviation. 

In hamster splitting experiments, the transition from unsplit to split behavior was not immediate, but emerged after some time in constant light, usually weeks. The intensity of the constant light affected the latency to split such that brighter constant light was more likely to lead to an earlier onset of splitting (Pickard et al., 1993). In our model, we observed a latency to split if the model was entrained to light/dark cycles before being switched to constant light (Fig. 4). Figure 4A shows the time course of the model nodes that are first entrained with several 24-hour cycles of light and dark pulses (light intensity, L = 0.05) and then exposed to total darkness (constant at an intensity of zero). As the model is transitioned to total darkness, the core and shell activity waveforms immediately change shape and decrease in amplitude. Despite these changes in waveform, the right and left nodes remain in phase for several oscillations (approximately from 300 to 650 hours). The model then spontaneously switches to split activity where the left and right nodes are out of phase with each other (after ~650 hours). The latency to split is dependent on the constant light intensity that follows the L/D cycles (Fig. 4B). When constant light intensity is in the lower end of the range, the latency to split gradually increases as constant light intensity increases up until a light intensity of 0.04. In the higher end of the 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.30.722022 doi: bioRxiv preprint

constant light intensity range, the latency to split gradually decreases as constant light intensity increases. Thus, the trend in the latency to split in the higher range of constant light intensities, but not the lower range, follows experimental observations. 

A B

Figure 4. Latency to split. The two hemispheres are connected only by a shared Fatigue signal that enters the vRcore and vLcore nodes. 

A. Example trace showing model being entrained to L/D before constant light conditions. At 300 hours, the light stim switched to D/D and the model maintained unsplit activity for approximately 300 hours before spontaneously switching to split activity. 

B. The latency to split. Model entrained to L/D cycles with light intensity L = 0.05 from -500 to 300 hours as in (A). At 300 hours, the model was subjected to constant light. Latency to split first increases with increasing constant light intensity, then after L = 0.04 it begins to decrease with increasing constant light intensity. 

Our model displays split activity in constant darkness (Fig. 1B, 3, 4B) which is contrary to experimental findings. Even after entraining to light/dark cycles wherein the model displays unsplit activity, switching to constant darkness results in a relatively rapid switch to split activity (Fig. 4B). Biologically, the internal clock of the freerunning animal enables it to maintain approximately 24 hour synchronized activity rhythms even without light cues. The unilateral version of the model has freerunning 24 hour activity in constant darkness (see Carpenter and Grossberg, 1984). The hemispheres of our bilateral model maintain 24-hour activity cycles individually in constant darkness, but the right and left hemispheres are out of sync (see Fig. 3) which would cause the animal to have the 12-hour sleep/wake cycles that are characteristic of splitting. This inconsistency between our model and the experimental findings suggested that our model was missing an essential feature. Classic studies demonstrate the existence of commissural core-to-core and shell-to-shell fibers (van den Pol, 1980; Card et al., 1981; Leak et al., 1999; Moore et al., 2002), but little is known about the role that inter-hemispheric connectivity plays in the oscillatory dynamics that drive behavior. We therefore focus the remainder of our studies on investigating the effects of inter-hemispheric coupling in our model. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.30.722022 doi: bioRxiv preprint

## Unsplit free-running activity requires excitatory contralateral connections 

To determine whether and how inter-hemisphere connectivity affects the dynamics of the model, we swept across a range of coupling strengths for two configurations of bilateral coupling: mutually coupled core nodes, and mutually coupled shell nodes. In simulations with constant dark conditions, we found that unsplit activity required excitatory contralateral connections in either of the two configurations (Fig. 5). Positive coupling strengths tended to reduce the period of the oscillations relative to the oscillation periods observed with negative coupling strengths. However, larger magnitude core-to-core coupling strengths resulted in longer period oscillations up to a point. Beyond a shell coupling strength of 1.0 or a core coupling strength of 0.21, the model no longer produced oscillations. Thus, unsplit activity with a 24-hour period in constant darkness was only achieved with core node coupling at a strength of approximately 0.21, but unsplit activity with periods less than 24-hours were generally achieved with excitatory cross-coupling of either core or shell nodes. Our bilateral model predicts that excitatory inter-hemisphere connections are needed to produce unsplit activity in conditions of constant darkness. 

A B C

Figure 5. 

A.  Period of vRshell (top) and relative phase between vRshell and vLshell (bottom) for sweeps through shell node contralateral coupling strengths, w shell , in constant dark conditions. 

B.  Period of vRshell (top) and relative phase between vRshell and vLshell (bottom) for sweeps through core node contralateral coupling strengths, w core , in constant dark conditions. 

C.  Example of model activity over time in constant dark (L = 0) with excitatory core node contralateral coupling strength, w core = 0.2. 

## Light intensity and cross-connectivity 

Although excitatory contralateral connections enabled stable unsplit activity in constant dark conditions (Fig. 5), the model is sensitive to constant light when the core nodes are coupled. At a moderate core coupling strength (w core = 0.2), the model ceased oscillations at light intensities greater than L = 0.01 (not shown). However, the model is able to entrain to light/dark cycles of moderate intensity when the core nodes are coupled with excitatory connections (not shown). Excitatory coupling between left and right shell nodes results in robust 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.30.722022 doi: bioRxiv preprint

unsplit activity across the constant light intensity spectrum (Fig. 6A). Additionally, increasing light intensity has a tendency to increase the period of oscillations as it did for the model with no contralateral connections. 

The unsplit activity displayed by the model with excitatory contralateral connections in constant dark conditions more closely resembles the activity one would observe in the biological system under constant dark conditions. Despite this, we did not observe a spontaneous switch to split activity in constant light, even when the model was entrained by light/dark cycles. This is because the excitatory connections stabilize the unsplit activity. Even a miniscule amount of excitatory cross-connectivity will push the latency to switch to later times until no switch can be observed within the time duration simulated. Given the lack of sensitivity to different initial conditions seen in Figure 6A, it is unlikely that the model with moderate to strong excitatory contralateral connections would exhibit such a switch, even for longer simulations. 

Inhibitory contralateral connections, on the other hand, had the effect of stabilizing split activity rhythms. When shell nodes are coupled with inhibitory connections, split activity is observed for the full range of constant light intensities (Fig. 6B). The periods are generally longer than 24 hours and have a U-shaped relationship with the magnitude of constant light intensity. Likewise, when core nodes are coupled with inhibitory connections, the relative phase also shows split activity (Fig. 6C). The periods are also longer than 24 hours but with an upside-down U-shaped relationship with the magnitude of constant light intensity. In comparison to the model with no inter-hemispheric connections (Fig. 3), the split activity with inhibitory inter-hemispheric connections is far more robust to initial conditions and displays a more rigid anti-phase relationship between the right and left nodes within a trial. 

A B C

Figure 6. 

A.  Period of vRshell (top) and relative phase between vRshell and vLshell (bottom) for sweeps through constant light intensity for model with excitatory inter-hemispheric shell coupling, w shell = 0.2. 

B.  Period of vRshell (top) and relative phase between vRshell and vLshell (bottom) for sweeps through constant light intensity for model with inhibitory inter-hemispheric shell coupling, w shell = -0.2. 

C.  Period of vRshell (top) and relative phase between vRshell and vLshell (bottom) for sweeps through constant light intensity for model with inhibitory inter-hemispheric core coupling, w core = -0.2. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.30.722022 doi: bioRxiv preprint

## Bifurcation analysis 

To better understand how the model dynamics depend on model parameters we next turn to bifurcation analysis. We focus this analysis on inter-hemisphere coupling strength and constant light intensity as our simulation results suggested that these are effective modes to transition model dynamics between split and unsplit modes. 

First, we analyzed the effect of changing the connectivity strength coupling the left and right shell nodes (w shell ). In the constant darkness condition, a one dimensional bifurcation analysis revealed that split and unsplit oscillations arise from two subcritical Hopf Bifurcations that face each other (Fig. 7A, points denoted by HB). The oscillations initially arising from the respective Hopf points are unstable (Fig. 7A, solid blue lines) but they become stable oscillations (Fig. 7A, solid green lines) through two Torus bifurcations occurring at w shell =0.0901 and 

wshell =0.0624 . Since the two Hopf bifurcations face each other, the initial unstable oscillations arising from the respective Hopf bifurcations are enveloped by stable oscillations arising from the opposing bifurcation. This results in the model displaying stable split or unsplit oscillations for complementary w shell values. 

The two torus bifurcations divided the space of model dynamics into split and unsplit regimes depending on the connectivity strength. It is also worth noting that there are two types of split oscillations, one in which the amplitude of the two hemispheres are the same and one in which they are different. For the following analysis, however, we will not distinguish between these two types of split modes. For connectivity weights such that w shell <0.0901, we find the split mode where the period and amplitude of the oscillations of the two hemispheres remains relatively constant. For w shell >0.0624 , we find the unsplit mode where the amplitude of the oscillations and period both increase as the w shell parameter increases. Finally, for w shell values close to 1, unsplit oscillations disappear by colliding with a stable fixed point (indicated by the red line in Fig. 7A) in a homoclinic bifurcation. 

The two-dimensional bifurcation diagram in Figure 7B extends the previous analysis across a range of constant light intensities. For the range of constant light intensities (y-axis of Fig. 7B), the model generally behaves similarly with regions of split oscillations for negative and zero values of w shell , unsplit oscillations for positive values of w shell and no oscillations as w shell 

becomes large. There is also a small region of bi-stability with both unsplit and split oscillations appearing to be stable. For L>0.04, we find that the boundary of split and unsplit oscillations is no longer demarcated by a torus bifurcation but instead occurs at a Period Doubling bifurcation or other bifurcation (denoted by dashed teal/orange line in Fig. 7B). 

Next, we look at the two dimensional bifurcation analysis for w core vs. constant light intensity (Fig 7C). We again see that the unsplit mode arises through a subcritical Hopf bifurcation (blue line), the oscillations of which become stable through a torus bifurcation for low to medium levels of constant light intensity (solid orange line), or a period doubling bifurcation (dashed orange line) for medium to high levels of constant light intensity. These stable unsplit oscillations persist until the oscillations collide with the branch of stable fixed points (red line). Stable oscillations for the split regime occur for a large range of w core values and are bounded below by the torus bifurcation (Fig. 7C, teal line). There are two small regimes of bi-stability (Fig. 7C, one is to the left of the teal line and to the right of the orange line, indicated by joint shading in both orange and teal, and the second is in the region where the top of the solid orange line protrudes into the teal region) where both unsplit and split modes 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.30.722022 doi: bioRxiv preprint

coexist. However, these regimes disappear as constant light intensity is increased (Fig. 7C, moving up the y-axis ). 

Finally, we investigated what happens for fixed w core values as the level of constant light intensity is varied. As an example, we consider setting w core =0.01 and look at the corresponding one dimensional bifurcation over the range of constant light intensities. This analysis (shown in Figure 7D, corresponding to the vertical dashed black line through Fig. 7C) reveals that the split mode is stable for all light intensity values, as indicated by the presence of the green line for the entire range of constant light intensities at this core connectivity strength. The unsplit mode, however, is mostly unstable except for a small region (0.029<=L<=0.032). This region corresponds to the small region of bi-stability that was discovered in Figure 7C. Together, panels 7B and 7C show that it is generally not possible to cross from a regime of stable split to unsplit modes by only changing the level of light in this model. The only exception to this would be to initialize the model on the split solution in a region of multi-stability and then move to the unsplit regime by increasing the magnitude of light intensity but this would require fine tuning in both the initial conditions as well as either of the inter-hemisphere coupling strengths. 

Figure 7. 

A.  1D bifurcation for no light condition. Black and red lines indicate unstable and stable fixed points, respectively. Blue and Green lines indicate envelopes of unstable and stable oscillations, respectively. Hopf Bifurcation (HB) points are labeled with white dots. 

B.  2D bifurcation of w shell vs. constant light intensity. Blue lines indicate locations of Hopf 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.30.722022 doi: bioRxiv preprint

bifurcations, grey line indicates bifurcation point where a single unstable fixed point branches into three unstable fixed points and red line indicates bifurcation point where unstable fixed point becomes stable. Regions of split, unsplit and no oscillations are indicated by blue, orange, and red shading respectively. Solid (dashed) border lines for unsplit and split regions indicate regions that are demarcated by the appearance of a torus (period doubling or other) bifurcation. 

C.  2D bifurcation of w core vs. constant light intensity. Colors are the same as in panel B. Dashed vertical black corresponds to panel D. The white region in the parameter space corresponds to a region that appears to display chaotic activity. 

D.  1D bifurcation over constant light intensity at fixed w core =0.01. Black solid line indicates an unstable fixed point. Blue and green lines indicate the envelope of split and unsplit stable oscillations. There are two types of split oscillations, one in which the vRshell and vLshell have the same amplitude and one in which they have different amplitudes. 

# Discussion 

Our study introduces a bi-hemispheric mathematical model of the SCN and demonstrates how the dynamics of the SCN may depend on factors such as external light conditions and hemisphere synaptic coupling strengths. Through simulation and bifurcation analysis, we provide a mechanistic interpretation of previously observed experimental phenomena and suggest new experiments that could further illuminate the circuit underlying the SCN. 

We first used simulations to investigate the conditions under which the bilateral model produces split versus unsplit activity. We found that the bilateral model automatically has split activity unless there are excitatory inter-hemispheric connections or strong light/dark input. This finding suggests that excitatory contralateral connections are needed to explain the experimentally observed synchronization seen in freerunning behavior (see Fig. 5). We also found that adjusting the strength and polarity of the inter-hemispheric connections was more effective at transitioning the model from unsplit to split than adjusting the constant light intensity (compare Figs. 5 and 6), suggesting that plasticity of commissural connections may be involved in the splitting phenomenon. 

To systematically evaluate the effect of inter-hemispheric connectivity and light input parameters, we next turned to bifurcation analysis. The analysis identified three regimes in the model corresponding to unsplit oscillations, split oscillations or the absence of oscillatory behavior altogether. While these three regimes existed when we varied coupling strength for either shell or core nodes, the allowable ranges of coupling strength and constant light intensity of these regimes varied significantly. For instance, our analysis revealed a larger range of coupling strengths for the shell nodes compared to the core nodes that results in unsplit activity, meaning that the unsplit activity is more robust to changes in synaptic strength. On the other hand, there is a more robust range of coupling strength of the core nodes relative to constant light intensity that supports a regime of bistability of unsplit and split modes. Furthermore, we found that there is no shell or core coupling strength, of those considered, for which the system changes from a region of purely unsplit to purely split regimes as constant light intensity 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.30.722022 doi: bioRxiv preprint

increases. The bistability region identified in Fig. 7C does suggest that it is possible to account for this observation by setting appropriate initial conditions to produce the unsplit mode in total darkness and then transition to the split mode as constant light intensity increases. This, however, would require fine-tuning of the core coupling parameter as well as fine tuning in the initial condition. The proposed region of bistability would also suggest that it should be possible to switch between the unsplit and split regions in complete darkness through a change in initial conditions such as the injection of current into the core or shell nodes. While we only explore the inclusion of either shell or core coupling in the present analysis, it is possible that including both types of coupling may provide a more robust way to explain light-dependent transitions between split to unsplit behavior. 

Our model is an expansion of a unilateral model of the SCN that explained the transition into the split rhythm as a frequency doubling of the core and shell cycles (Carpenter and Grossberg, 1985). While the classic splitting behavior does present as a doubling of the rest/wake cycle frequency (Pittendrigh, 1960b; National Research Council, 1971), the underlying activity of the SCN during splitting was not known at the time that Carpenter and Grossberg developed their model. Subsequent experiments revealed that the ipsilateral core and shell are in antiphase while the left and right hemispheres are also in antiphase, all while each of the four nodes oscillate with an approximate 24-hour period (de la Iglesia et al., 2000; Yan et al., 2005; Butler et al., 2012). This results in a doubling of rest/wake cycles as the animal is driven into a “split” brain state by the divergent activity of the left and right SCN (de la Iglesia et al., 2000). In a model with a finite number of phase oscillators, where half the population has the opposite phase as the other half, negative coupling terms were required for stable activity (Indic et al., 2007). Such a model captures either the phase-splitting of the left and right SCN or the phase-splitting of the core and shell, but it does not capture both simultaneously. Our model more accurately captures the dynamics of the split SCN than previous models that simulate the transition to the split activity as a frequency-doubling of any part of the SCN. 

A model of two coupled oscillators formed by Wilson-Cowan-style populations of mutually coupled excitatory and inhibitory nodes exhibits the 4-node split (Kawato and Suzuki, 1980). As their “environmental” parameter is varied, the model transitions between split and unsplit activity similar to how our model transitioned between split and unsplit with changes in the inter-hemisphere coupling. Like the dual-oscillator Wilson-Cowan model, our bifurcation analysis also revealed that the split or unsplit oscillations stabilize via a torus bifurcation. Similar bifurcations have been observed in other systems of weakly coupled oscillators (Borisyuk et al., 1995). Our model most closely resembles the excitatory to excitatory coupling between Wilson-Cowan oscillators described in Borisyuk et al. 1995 in that for very small positive coupling strength, the system displays a stable split mode and then transitions to a stable unsplit mode through a series of torus bifurcations that interact with each other. Unlike the Borisyuk et al. (1995) model which features interaction between explicit excitatory and inhibitory populations, our system has shell and core nodes that self-excite but inhibit each other as well as an additional Fatigue signal that affects the dynamics. As a result, the specifics of the interactions of the bifurcations that transition the system from split to unsplit modes differ. 

In conclusion, we sought to model the 4-node split to investigate how light intensity and coupling strength affect the transition from unsplit to split activity. Our results suggest that excitatory inter-hemisphere SCN coupling may be responsible for stable, in-phase freerunning activity across the two hemispheres, and that plasticity or modulation of the inter-hemisphere 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.30.722022 doi: bioRxiv preprint

connections can elicit 4-node split activity. Our reduced model does not capture the emergent dynamics that result from the thousands of individual oscillators that compose the SCN, instead lumping entire populations of the SCN into four distinct nodes. Future studies may test the role of inter-hemispheric connections in a more detailed model. 

# Bibliography 

Abrahamson EE, Moore RY (2001) Suprachiasmatic nucleus in the mouse: retinal innervation, intrinsic organization and efferent projections. Brain Res 916:172–191. 

Albers HE, Walton JC, Gamble KL, McNeill JK, Hummer DL (2017) The dynamics of GABA signaling: Revelations from the circadian pacemaker in the suprachiasmatic nucleus. Front Neuroendocrinol 44:35–82. 

Antle MC, Silver R (2005) Orchestrating time: arrangements of the brain circadian clock. Trends Neurosci 28:145–151. 

Antle MC, Smith VM, Sterniczuk R, Yamakawa GR, Rakai BD (2009) Physiological responses of the circadian clock to acute light exposure at night. Rev Endocr Metab Disord 10:279–291. 

Bano-Otalora B, Moye MJ, Brown T, Lucas RJ, Diekman CO, Belle MD (2021) Daily electrical activity in the master circadian clock of a diurnal mammal Dulac C, Tessmar-Raible K, Allen CN, eds. eLife 10:e68179. 

Berson DM, Dunn FA, Takao M (2002) Phototransduction by retinal ganglion cells that set the circadian clock. Science 295:1070–1073. 

Borisyuk GN, Borisyuk RM, Khibnik AI, Roose D (1995) Dynamics and bifurcations of two coupled neural oscillators with different connection types. Bull Math Biol 57:809–840. 

Butler MP, Rainbow MN, Rodriguez E, Lyon SM, Silver R (2012) Twelve-hour days in the brain and behavior of split hamsters. Eur J Neurosci 36:2556–2566. 

Card JP, Brecha N, Karten HJ, Moore RY (1981) Immunocytochemical localization of vasoactive intestinal polypeptide- containing cells and processes in the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the rat: light and electron microscopic analysis. J Neurosci 1:1289–1303. 

Carpenter GA, Grossberg S (1984) A neural theory of circadian rhythms: Aschoff’s rule in diurnal and nocturnal mammals. Am J Physiol-Regul Integr Comp Physiol 247:R1067–R1082. 

Carpenter GA, Grossberg S (1985) A neural theory of circadian rhythms: Split rhythms, after-effects and motivational interactions. J Theor Biol 113:163–223. 

Colwell CS (2011) Linking neural activity and molecular oscillations in the SCN. Nat Rev Neurosci 12:553–569. 

Daan S, Berde C (1978) Two coupled oscillators: Simulations of the circadian pacemaker in mammalian activity rhythms. J Theor Biol 70:297–313. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.30.722022 doi: bioRxiv preprint

de la Iglesia HO, Meyer J, Carpino A, Schwartz WJ (2000) Antiphase Oscillation of the Left and Right Suprachiasmatic Nuclei. Science 290:799–801. 

Dibner C, Schibler U, Albrecht U (2010) The Mammalian Circadian Timing System: Organization and Coordination of Central and Peripheral Clocks. Annu Rev Physiol 72:517–549. 

Evans JA, Schwartz WJ (2024) On the origin and evolution of the dual oscillator model underlying the photoperiodic clockwork in the suprachiasmatic nucleus. J Comp Physiol A 210:503–511. 

Farajnia S, van Westering TLE, Meijer JH, Michel S (2014) Seasonal induction of GABAergic excitation in the central mammalian clock. Proc Natl Acad Sci 111:9627–9632. 

Guenthner CJ, Luitje ME, Pyle LA, Molyneux PC, Yu JK, Li AS, Leise TL, Harrington ME (2014) Circadian Rhythms of PER2::LUC in Individual Primary Mouse Hepatocytes and Cultures. PLOS ONE 9:e87573. 

Harrington ME, Eskes GA, Dickson P, Rusak B (1990) Lesions dorsal to the suprachiasmatic nuclei abolish split activity rhythms of hamsters. Brain Res Bull 24:593–597. 

Hastings MH, Maywood ES, Brancaccio M (2018) Generation of circadian rhythms in the suprachiasmatic nucleus. Nat Rev Neurosci 19:453–469. 

Indic P, Schwartz WJ, Paydarfar D (2007) Design principles for phase-splitting behaviour of coupled cellular oscillators: clues from hamsters with ‘split’ circadian rhythms. J R Soc Interface 5:873–883. 

Kawato M, Suzuki R (1980) Two coupled neural oscillators as a model of the circadian pacemaker. J Theor Biol 86:547–575. 

Leak RK, Card JP, Moore RY (1999) Suprachiasmatic pacemaker organization analyzed by viral transynaptic transport. Brain Res 819:23–32. 

Majercak J, Sidote D, Hardin PE, Edery I (1999) How a Circadian Clock Adapts to Seasonal Decreases in Temperature and Day Length. Neuron 24:219–230. 

Maywood ES, Reddy AB, Wong GKY, O’Neill JS, O’Brien JA, McMahon DG, Harmar AJ, Okamura H, Hastings MH (2006) Synchronization and Maintenance of Timekeeping in Suprachiasmatic Circadian Clock Cells by Neuropeptidergic Signaling. Curr Biol 16:599–605. 

Meijer JH, Watanabe K, Schaap J, Albus H, Détári L (1998) Light Responsiveness of the Suprachiasmatic Nucleus: Long-Term Multiunit and Single-Unit Recordings in Freely Moving Rats. J Neurosci 18:9078–9087. 

Merrow M, Harrington M (2020) A functional context for heterogeneity of the circadian clock in cells. PLOS Biol 18:e3000927. 

Michel S, Marek R, vanderLeest HT, vanSteensel MJ, Schwartz WJ, Colwell CS, Meijer JH (2013) Mechanism of bilateral communication in the suprachiasmatic nucleus. Eur J Neurosci 37:964–971. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.30.722022 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Moore RY, Speh JC, Leak RK (2002) Suprachiasmatic nucleus organization. Cell Tissue Res 309:89–98. 

Moore RY, Speh JC, Patrick Card J (1995) The retinohypothalamic tract originates from a distinct subset of retinal ganglion cells. J Comp Neurol 352:351–366. 

Nakamura W, Yamazaki S, Nakamura TJ, Shirakawa T, Block GD, Takumi T (2008) In Vivo Monitoring of Circadian Timing in Freely Moving Mice. Curr Biol 18:381–385. 

National Research Council (1971) Biochronometry: Proceedings of a Symposium 1971. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. Available at: https://www.nationalacademies.org/publications/20594 [Accessed March 24, 2026]. 

Paul KN, Saafir TB, Tosini G (2009) The role of retinal photoreceptors in the regulation of circadian rhythms. Rev Endocr Metab Disord 10:271–278. 

Pickard GE (1982) The afferent connections of the suprachiasmatic nucleus of the golden hamster with emphasis on the retinohypothalamic projection. J Comp Neurol 211:65–83. 

Pickard GE, Turek FW (1982) Splitting of the Circadian Rhythm of Activity Is Abolished by Unilateral Lesions of the Suprachiasmatic Nuclei. Science 215:1119–1121. 

Pickard GE, Turek FW, Sollars PJ (1993) Light intensity and splitting in the golden hamster. Physiol Behav 54:1–5. 

Pittendrigh CS (1960a) Circadian Rhythms and the Circadian Organization of Living Systems. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 25:159–184. 

Pittendrigh CS (1960b) Circadian Rhythms and the Circadian Organization of Living Systems. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol 25:159–184. 

Pittendrigh CS, Daan S (1976) A functional analysis of circadian pacemakers in nocturnal rodents. J Comp Physiol 106:333–355. 

Rusak B (1977) The role of the suprachiasmatic nuclei in the generation of circadian rhythms in the golden hamster,Mesocricetus auratus. J Comp Physiol 118:145–164. 

Silver R, LeSauter J, Tresco PA, Lehman MN (1996) A diffusible coupling signal from the transplanted suprachiasmatic nucleus controlling circadian locomotor rhythms. Nature 382:810–813. 

Tavakoli-Nezhad M, Schwartz WJ (2005) c-Fos Expression in the Brains of Behaviorally “Split” Hamsters in Constant Light: Calling Attention to a Dorsolateral Region of the Suprachiasmatic Nucleus and the Medial Division of the Lateral Habenula. J Biol Rhythms 20:419–429. 

van den Pol AN (1980) The hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nucleus of rat: Intrinsic anatomy. J Comp Neurol 191:661–702. 

Webb AB, Angelo N, Huettner JE, Herzog ED (2009) Intrinsic, nondeterministic circadian rhythm generation in identified mammalian neurons. Proc Natl Acad Sci 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.30.722022 doi: bioRxiv preprint

106:16493–16498. 

Welsh DK, Takahashi JS, Kay SA (2010) Suprachiasmatic Nucleus: Cell Autonomy and Network Properties. Annu Rev Physiol 72:551–577. 

Yan L, Foley NC, Bobula JM, Kriegsfeld LJ, Silver R (2005) Two Antiphase Oscillations Occur in Each Suprachiasmatic Nucleus of Behaviorally Split Hamsters. J Neurosci 25:9017–9026. 

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.30.722022 doi: bioRxiv preprint Acknowledgements 

We would like to thank Rae Silver, Duncan Foley, and Nico Foley for their early involvement in this study. This work was also supported in part by the Barnard-Columbia Summer Research Institute (SRI) and the Science Pathways Scholar Program (SP2) at Barnard College. 

# Author Contributions 

Contributions according to  CRediT criteria .

# Role  Definition  author(s) 

1 Conceptualization  Ideas; formulation or evolution of overarching research goals and aims.  GJG 

2 Data curation 

Management activities to annotate (produce metadata), scrub data and maintain research data (including software code, where it is necessary for interpreting the data itself) for initial use or later reuse. 

GJG 

3 Formal analysis 

Application of statistical, mathematical, computational, or other formal techniques to analyze or synthesize study data. 

GJG, KZ, JM, AL, JN 

4 Funding acquisition  Acquisition of the financial support for the project leading to this publication.  GJG 

5 Investigation 

Conducting a research and investigation process, specifically performing the experiments, or data/evidence collection. 

GJG, KZ, JM, AL, JN 

6 Methodology  Development or design of methodology; creation of models.  GJG, KZ 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.30.722022 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7 Project administration 

Management and coordination responsibility for the research activity planning and execution.  GJG 

8 Resources 

Provision of study materials, reagents, materials, patients, laboratory samples, animals, instrumentation, computing resources or other analysis tools. 

GJG 

9 Software 

Programming software development; designing computer programs; implementation of the computer code and supporting algorithms; testing of existing code components. 

GJG, KZ, JM, AL, JN 

10  Supervision 

Oversight and leadership responsibility for the research activity planning and execution including mentorship external to the core team. 

GJG 

11  Validation 

Verification whether as a part of the activity or separate, of overall replication/reproducibility results/experiments/other research outputs. 

GJG 

12  Visualization  Preparation creation presentation published work specifically visualization/data presentation.  GJG, KZ 

13  Writing – original draft 

Preparation creation presentation published work specifically writing initial draft (including substantive translation). 

GJG, KZ 

14  Writing – review & editing 

Preparation creation presentation published work by those from original research group specifically critical review commentary revision including pre-post-publication stages. 

GJG, KZ, JM, AL, JN 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.30.722022 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# Statements and Declarations 

## Ethical Considerations 

No human or animal subjects were included in this study. 

## Consent to Participate 

Not applicable 

## Consent for Publication 

N/A 

## Declaration of Conflicting Interest 

The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. 

# Funding Statement 

This research was funded by NIH NINDS KS22NS104187. 

# Data Availability 

All data are computer-simulated and can be regenerated using the simulation code available in the SCN-split-model Github repository at 

https://github.com/Gutierrez-lab/bilateral-SCN-gated-pacemaker .

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted May 5, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.30.722022 doi: bioRxiv preprint