Title: Hippocampo-neocortical interaction as compressive retrieval-augmented generation

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950v4.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 47

Markdown Content:
# Hippocampo-neocortical interaction as compressive retrieval-augmented generation 

Eleanor Spens & Neil Burgess 

Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, University College London 

Many aspects of learning, memory, and problem solving involve interplay between episodic (hippocampal) and semantic (neocortical) systems, but the neural mechanisms supporting this are unclear. We present a computational model in which sequential experi-ences are encoded in hippocampus in compressed form and replayed to train a neocortical generative network. This network captures the gist of specific episodes and extracts statis-tical patterns that generalise to new situations, enabling efficient reconstruction of the past and prediction of the future. The two systems interact during encoding, recall and problem solving, with the hippocampus retrieving relevant episodic information into working mem-ory as a basis for generation using the ‘general knowledge’ of the neocortical network. We simulate this interaction as ‘retrieval-augmented generation’, with the addition of mech-anisms to compress episodic memories into hippocampus and to consolidate them into neocortex. The model explains changes to memories over time, including schema-based distortions, and shows how episodic and semantic memory contribute to problem solving. 

# 1 Introduction 1

Despite the success of the theorised distinction between episodic (hippocampal) and semantic (neocortical) 2

systems, and long-standing ideas regarding the consolidation of memories from hippocampus to neocortex 3

(1–4 ), how both systems work together to support a wide variety of cognitive functions is unclear. These 4

include recollection and problem solving, which rely on a variable mixture of specific episodic memories 5

from the hippocampus and more general knowledge from the neocortex ( 5, 6 ). Here we lay out a framework 6

for how this co-operation occurs, and make use of recent advances in machine learning to simulate how 7

the resulting system would perform these functions for comparison with human performance. This builds 8

on many years of theoretical insights into the relationship between schemas and memory ( 7–12 ), and their 9

potential correspondence to large language models ( 13, 14 ). 10 

We explore three questions, and implement our hypothesised solutions as a computational model (see 11 

Table 1): 12 

1. How does episodic memory influence semantic memory? We hypothesise that a deep generative model 13 

in neocortex is trained to predict its own inputs, using memories of episodic experiences replayed 14 

from hippocampus (and during the experiences themselves). In this way it develops generalisable 15 

(semantic) knowledge, enabling it to generate episodes from an initial input. With enough consolidation, 16 

neocortex can approximately reconstruct memories without the hippocampus, allowing the redundant 17 

hippocampal trace to fade away. 18 

2. How does semantic memory influence episodic memory? We hypothesise that the hippocampus, 19 

which must use neocortical representations for input and output, stores episodic memories in a highly 20 

1

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

compressed form, as a minimal subset of information from which the generative model can reconstruct 21 

each episode, combining both general schemas and episode-unique features. 22 

3. How do semantic and episodic memory interact during recall and problem solving? We hypothesise 23 

that hippocampus and neocortex work together to solve problems, with the hippocampus providing 24 

specific episodes and the neocortex generating predictions from semantic memory informed by these 25 

episodes. In other words, episodic contributions to problem solving correspond to the hippocampus 26 

retrieving relevant memories on which to base neocortical generation in working memory. Simply 27 

recalling a memory also requires neocortical predictions to reconstruct an event from its compressed 28 

hippocampal trace. 29 

We implement these ideas in a computational model in which compressed hippocampal memories relevant 30 

to a task are retrieved into working memory as context for a neocortical generative network, which is trained 31 

on replayed hippocampal memories through consolidation. This enables the generative network to develop 32 

generalisable semantic knowledge which supports problem solving, to reconstruct episodes efficiently from 33 

minimal hippocampal traces, and eventually to capture the facts of specific events. Our model reflects the 34 

complex interplay between episodic and semantic memory; semantic memory is acquired by learning to 35 

reconstruct episodic memories, but also shapes the representation of these episodes, both in terms of their 36 

initial encoding and their gradual schematisation. 37 

Here working memory refers to the temporary retention of a limited amount of information ( 15 ), including 38 

episodic memories retrieved from long-term memory into the ‘episodic buffer’ ( 16 ), which can accommodate 39 

considerably more than the 4 or so items that can be attended to at a given moment ( 16, 17 ). This is the 40 

‘workspace’ into which episodic memories relevant to a task are retrieved from the hippocampus, upon which 41 

the neocortical network operates. 42 

We first consider simple narratives representing autobiographical episodes, and demonstrate how they are 43 

i) encoded in compressed form in hippocampus, ii) retrieved and decompressed by the neocortical generative 44 

model, and iii) consolidated into the neocortical generative model. We show that the model predicts changes 45 

to the content of memory over time, such as greater abstraction and the loss of specific detail, as seen in 46 

human memory ( 18, 19 ). We also show that the compression aspect of the model enables efficient storage 47 

and reconstruction, suggesting how rich and complex events can be stored over a lifetime without exceeding 48 

limited hippocampal capacity. Next, we show how encoding and consolidation don’t just result in loss of detail, 49 

but systematically distort memories towards expectations in our model, matching experimental data ( 20,21 ). 50 

Finally, we show how consolidation develops generalisable knowledge in the neocortical network ( 22 ), 51 

allowing problem solving by combining this with relevant specifics, which are loaded into working memory 52 

from hippocampus or ongoing experience. Our model works with both linguistic and non-linguistic stimuli, 53 

and is thus applicable to sequential experience of many kinds. 54 

Implementing the model via compressive retrieval-augmented generation 55 

Here we use transformer-based large language models ( 23 ) to simulate how neocortical networks combine 56 

with the hippocampus to extract semantic knowledge from sequential experiences, and to support memory 57 

and problem solving. 58 

Machine learning has shown how deep neural networks can act as task-general ‘foundation models’ ( 24 ). 59 

In particular, large language models (LLMs) demonstrate that complex sequential behaviours can develop 60 

as a byproduct of a simple ‘next item prediction’ task ( 23, 25 ), with distributed semantic representations 61 

slowly learned over time, in a way analogous to the development of semantic memory in neocortex ( 26 ). (See 62 

Section 4.1 for further details.) Here we suggest that memory consolidation corresponds to the development 63 

of neural ‘foundation models’ in a similar way, with neocortex learning to reconstruct replayed memories via 64 

schemas (see ( 27 )). Crucially, LLMs can memorise specific sequences as well as learning generalities ( 28 ), 65 

2

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

meaning that both event-unique information and patterns across events can be captured within the same 66 

network. We model consolidation as the training of autoregressive sequence models, simulated using Mistral 67 

7B ( 29 ) and GPT-2 ( 23 ), on sequences which represent replayed hippocampal memories. Consolidation can 68 

thus be thought of as teacher-student learning (see ( 30 )). The objective during training is simply to predict the 69 

next item in sequences from the training data. Once trained, the network can continue an input sequence, or 70 

generate a new sequence from scratch, by iteratively predicting the next item from the items in the ‘prompt’ 71 

or ‘context’ which models the content of working memory. 72 

The hippocampus is modelled simply using modern Hopfield networks ( 31 ), storing states which can 73 

be retrieved autoassociatively as well as the one-step transitions between them. Whilst not the focus of this 74 

paper, this illustrates the hypothesis that hippocampus and neocortex use very different mechanisms for 75 

sequence memory, though both bind together neocortical representations. 76 

We propose that the hippocampal ‘memory bank’ and neocortical generative network work together to 77 

enable problem solving, with the hippocampus retrieving memories relevant to a new task into working 78 

memory as context for the generative network. Specifically, we draw inspiration from retrieval-augmented 79 

generation (RAG; ( 32 )), which involves prompting LLMs with relevant data retrieved from external memory, 80 

as a model of drawing on relevant memories to inform predictions in a new situation (see also ( 13 )). A typical 81 

task for RAG might be question answering based on a set of new facts which do not feature in the training 82 

data for the LLM. To ask the system a question, first the most relevant items are found in the external memory 83 

(using some similarity metric). A ‘prompt’ is then constructed, in which the retrieved items are given to the 84 

LLM together with the question (see Figure 1). 85 

We suggest that hippocampal-neocortical interaction resembles RAG, but crucially with additional com-86 

pression and consolidation mechanisms. Memories in the hippocampus are stored in a compact conceptual 87 

form, as in the LLM literature on context compression (e.g. ( 33 )). Compression is a natural consequence 88 

of schema learning; schemas develop in neocortex over time, and thus feature in hippocampal traces which 89 

bind together neocortical representations. Consolidation then gradually trains the neocortical generative 90 

network on memories from the hippocampus. The conceptual representations in hippocampus result from 91 

compressing experience in a way that is optimal for efficient reconstruction of memories by neocortex, and 92 

all recall of hippocampal traces is retrieval-augmented generation, requiring the generative network to fill in 93 

the outline of a memory with its predictions. 94 

The ‘context’ (or ‘prompt’) provided to an LLM can be thought of as its ‘working memory’ ( 34 ), with 95 

the limited context length of an LLM representing the limited capacity of biological working memory. Note 96 

that the neocortical model’s outputs could be prompted by perception rather than memory using the same 97 

mechanism. 98 

Previous work 99 

There is a long history of examining how short, medium, and long-term stores support encoding, consoli-100 

dation, and recall across the ‘lifespan’ of a memory (e.g. ( 42 )). Crucially, semantic memory is thought to 101 

be extracted from episodic memory through consolidation ( 2, 3, 43 ), learning statistical relationships from 102 

experience to aid prediction and thus survival ( 44 ). But episodic memories also feature conceptual repre-103 

sentations from semantic memory ( 45, 46 ); to use the terminology of Piaget ( 47 ), the encoding of memories 104 

using existing schemas reflects ‘assimilation’, while the updating of schemas from memories reflects ‘accom-105 

modation’. Both semantic and episodic memory can interact within working memory when reconstructing 106 

what happened in the past or imagining what will happen in the future ( 48 ), with episodic memory contribut-107 

ing specifics and semantic memory contributing generalisable knowledge ( 49 ). The conception of memory 108 

as (re)constructed rather than veridical ( 20 ) highlights the potential of recently developed deep generative 109 

networks to shed new light on these questions. 110 

The idea that memories are rapidly encoded by the hippocampus and then replayed over the course of 111 

3

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Question Our hypothesis Implementation in model Simulations Relevant existing models 

How does episodic memory influence semantic memory? 

SM develops through the consolidation of EM. General knowledge can be derived by prediction error minimisation on specific memories. Consolidation mechanism: reconstructed sequences from the model hippocampus are used to train the generative network representing neocortex. The gist of events is consolidated into the model neocortex (Sections 2.1 and 2.2). Non-linguistic tasks can also be learned (Section 2.3). Many models stemming from Complementary Learning Systems account ( 3): SM gradually learned from EM. Consolidation of EM regulated for SM generalisation (e.g. ( 30 )). (27 ) model consolidation as training of generative network on replayed EM. How does semantic memory influence episodic memory? 

EM is compressed based on SM, with a minimal subset of neocortical representations indexed for approximate reconstruction of an event by neocortex. Consolidation mechanism produces ‘approximation of approximation’. Compression mechanism: each EM is stored as a gist vector, plus residual poorly predicted elements, from which the LLM approximately reconstructs sequence via RAG. Consolidation mechanism: LLM is trained on memory reconstructed from gist and details, not the original sequence. Recall of recent memories as RAG (Section 2.1). The model displays a similar pattern of memory distortions to human data. Context maintenance and retrieval model ( 35 ), building on ( 36 ): semantic context encoded in hippocampus. (37 ) model EM encoding as ‘lossy compression’ using SM, explaining gist-based distortions. (38 ) and ( 27 ) models for simple non-sequential stimuli: EMs as latent code plus unpredictable details. Tolman-Eichenbaum machine ( 22 )for relational inference: new entities bound to positions in a familiar graph. SLIMM framework ( 8): surprising EM content encoded more in hippocampus, while SM-congruent EM better remembered by cortex, thus U-shaped relationship between SM-congruence and memory. Context compression LLM literature, e.g. ( 33 ). How do semantic and episodic memory interact during recall and problem solving? 

EM and SM combine in working memory to solve problems. EM is retrieved from the hippocampus (‘in context’ memory), while SM makes predictions based on this (‘in weights’ memory). Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG): EM as in-context sequences retrieved associatively from hippocampus, SM as in-weights information in neocortex. Recall of recent memories as RAG (Sections 2.1 and 2.2). Episodic contributions to problem solving as RAG (Section 2.3). Episodic contributions to reinforcement learning ( 39 ): memories for specific episodes are combined with a general policy. Tolman-Eichenbaum machine ( 22 )for relational inference: solving new problems combines learned graph structure with arbitrary specifics. (13 ) review parallels between LLMs with external memory and human cognition. EM-LLM ( 40 ) and others draw inspiration from episodic memory to help LLMs handle long contexts. (41 ) and others incorporate associative memory for ‘episodic’ information into the LLM itself. 

Table 1 : Three questions about the interaction between episodic memory (EM), semantic memory (SM), and working memory (WM), our hypothesised solutions, how we implement our hypotheses computationally using large language models (LLMs) and retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), the relevant results, and relevant previous models. 4

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 1 : Summary of model. a) Episodic memories are first encoded in the hippocampus, then replayed during rest to train a generative network (simulated by an LLM) which thereby acquires semantic knowledge. The hippocampus and neocortex interact to play complementary roles during problem solving, resembling ‘retrieval-augmented generation’ (RAG; ( 32 )). Relevant hippocampal traces are retrieved into working mem-ory and used to ‘prompt’ the neocortical network. The hippocampus is modelled with modern Hopfield networks ( 31 ) storing states and one-step transitions between them. b) Sequences are encoded in the hip-pocampus in compressed form. Specifically, a vector from which the sequence can be approximately decoded by neocortex is stored for each event, together with the subsequences that are most surprising given this compressed version of the event. c) The neocortical and hippocampal networks work together to recall memories and solve problems via RAG, e.g. when encountering a new task which requires inferences to be drawn based on hippocampal memories. d) Memories are replayed from the hippocampus during rest, and the generative network captures their statistics through prediction error minimisation. e) RAG for LLMs. When the generative network (neocortex) is prompted with a query, related information is retrieved from external memory (hippocampus). The retrieval process finds stored information with similar vectors (produced by a ‘text embedding model’) to the query. A combined prompt is then created from the query and the retrieved information, improving the output from the generative network. f) RAG with context compression using xRAG ( 33 ). A small network, trained with the LLM, maps vectors from the text embedding model into a single token representation (a token is the atomic unit an LLM operates over, i.e. a ‘chunk’ of characters), which is fed into the first layer of the LLM together with the tokens of the query. 5

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

systems consolidation to train a generative or predictive model of the world in neocortex has received much 112 

recent interest. The combined system is thought to support multiple cognitive functions including episodic 113 

memory, semantic memory, imagination, and inference ( 27, 30, 38, 50, 51 ). This provides a mechanistic 114 

account of the theory that episodic memories are reconstructions that are influenced by our beliefs, i.e. 115 

that recall involves ‘predicting’ the past ( 37, 52, 53 ). However previous work has focused on static patterns, 116 

whereas episodes are sequential, and arguably the most crucial function of semantic knowledge involves 117 

prediction of what will come next. 118 

Memory helps to predict the future, not just recall the past ( 44 ). Planning often requires anticipating 119 

the outcome of a possible action, e.g. the sequence of future states and rewards that would follow it. The 120 

mental simulation of future states to aid decision-making is known as ‘model-based’ planning ( 54,55 ), which 121 

improves with consolidation ( 56 ). We suggest that the generative network trained on memories can simulate 122 

events to support behaviour, such as when deciding between possible actions, or when inferring the next 123 

state given the sequence so far. (See also ( 57 ).) 124 

# 2 Results 125 

In Section 2.1 we explore the compression, encoding, recall, consolidation, and forgetting of narrative events. 126 

We show how each event can be efficiently encoded in the hippocampus as a conceptual code plus surprising 127 

details, from which the neocortex reconstructs the event during recall via ‘retrieval-augmented generation’, 128 

with these reconstructions gradually consolidated into neocortex, where interference from new consolidation 129 

produces forgetting. We show from simulations how this produces the changes observed in human memory 130 

over time. 131 

In Section 2.2 we explore how the model captures the influence of semantic memory on episodic 132 

memory, and show that characteristic distortions towards the ‘priors’ of the network arise as a consequence, 133 

which captures gist-based distortions seen in human memory. In Section 2.3 we show that consolidation 134 

of memories into the neocortical network enables learning of shared structure, which can be used to solve 135 

new problems. We simulate human behaviour in two non-linguistic relational inference tasks, involving the 136 

prediction of new spatial or family relationships. We also show that human-like problem solving is supported 137 

by the mapping of new tasks to a learned representation in the hidden layers. 138 

We model the hippocampal network as a sequential variant of the modern Hopfield network (MHN) for 139 

recalling state 𝑛 + 1 given state 𝑛 (31, 58 ), coupled with a MHN for retrieving state 𝑛 from a noisy or partial 140 

version. Given a state as a cue, recall is simulated by finding the nearest stored state with the latter MHN, and 141 

retrieving the rest of the sequence with the former. For further details see Section 4.2.2. Replay is simulated 142 

by randomly sampling from the set of memory units corresponding to the first state of the sequence, and 143 

retrieving the rest of it. Sequences are repeated many times during training, reflecting offline replay rather 144 

than online learning from a single exposure. (Note that after confirming that the model hippocampus can 145 

recapitulate sequences in each task, we avoid unnecessary computational cost by using these sequences 146 

directly, unless stated otherwise below.) 147 

2.1 Modelling hippocampal-neocortical interaction as retrieval-augmented generation 148 

We begin by simulating the compression, encoding, and consolidation of memories, and the differing 149 

mechanisms for recall over the course of a memory’s lifespan. 150 

2.1.1 The compression and encoding of episodic memory 151 

In our model memories are compressed for efficient storage ( 59, 60 ). Neocortex captures the gist of the 152 

episode, which is stored in hippocampus together with unpredictable details. The stored hippocampal gist 153 

6

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

vector and additional details are unpacked by neocortex into a full description of the episode during recall. 154 

This explains not only the presence of conceptual representations in hippocampus ( 45 ), but also the fact that 155 

memories are schematised from the time of encoding ( 61, 62 ). 156 

Retrieval-augmented generation is used to reconstruct memories or solve new problems based on this 157 

compressed information, with hippocampal traces retrieved based on relevance to the current task or prompt, 158 

and loaded into the context of the generative network. This minimises the hippocampal storage of redundant 159 

information that is already well-predicted by the generative network (see also ( 27 )). In other words, this 160 

hippocampal representation allows the neocortical network to (re)generate experiences in a more efficient 161 

way, and the conceptual representations are optimised to enable generation. We simulate this by following 162 

recent LLM research on ‘context compression’, aimed at mitigating the practical problems of dealing with 163 

very long prompts by transforming them into vectors which capture their meanings ( 33, 63 ). 164 

Here we use the Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 ( 29 ) LLM to represent the neocortical network, together with 165 

pre-trained weights from ( 33 ) to transform episodes into compressed xRAG vectors. The small compression 166 

network loosely represents the neocortex’s ability to perform dimensionality reduction ( 64 ) and produce 167 

gist-like representations of events ( 65 ). This is one of several approaches to context compression which learn 168 

a compact vector representation of text (see also ( 63 )), and does not require any special training of the LLM 169 

itself - just additional weights that map the vector representation of a sequence (i.e. the output of a ‘text 170 

embedding’ model) to a token in the input layer of the LLM (see Figure 1f). Note that tokens are chunks of 171 

co-occurring characters that make up the basic units processed by an LLM. 172 

To illustrate how gist, detail, and semantic memory interact, we simulate the encoding and recall of 173 

narrative events (Figure 2), using 500 stories from the ROC Stories dataset ( 66 ). To encode a story in 174 

compressed form, its embedding is obtained from the text embedding model ( 67 ), from which the xRAG 175 

vector is derived via the xRAG weights. Each story is encoded as its xRAG vector plus unpredictable details 176 

in the model hippocampus. To identify unpredictable details, all phrases are extracted from the text, then the 177 

perplexity (a measure of prediction error) of each phrase given the xRAG vector is calculated. In other words, 178 

for each phrase, the model is prompted with the xRAG vector and the phrase in question. Then the phrases 179 

are ranked in descending order of perplexity, with the top n phrases stored as the unpredictable details. See 180 

Section 4.2.1 for further details. 181 

Given a query as the input to recall, the neocortex ‘searches’ the hippocampus for relevant traces. This 182 

is simulated by producing an xRAG vector for the query (as described above), and then by retrieving the 183 

trace(s) with the nearest xRAG vector(s) from the model hippocampus (see Figure S1). The context given to 184 

the LLM consists of the xRAG vector(s), the details, and a prompt describing the task. Note that the xRAG 185 

vector only occupies the space of a single token in this input. The final recalled story is the output of the 186 

LLM. 187 

Figure 2e and Table S1 show examples of encoded and recalled stories. For instance, a story about a 188 

girl’s visit to an aquarium is encoded as its gist vector and a surprising detail (that the girl took a nap on 189 

the journey). The model neocortex reconstructs an approximation of the original story from the gist vector 190 

and the detail, with a few semantic intrusions added to the story, e.g. ‘Melody’s favorite part was the shark 191 

tank’; these intrusions are shaped by the expectations of the model neocortex, as in ( 20 ). This hints at how 192 

gist, detail, and semantic memory can interact in the model during recall. 193 

The encoding of gist plus details was also compared to three baselines: encoding the story in full detail, 194 

encoding only the gist, and simply imagining the continuation (i.e. without using the model hippocampus 195 

at all). The mean size per memory (in tokens) and the accuracy of recall (the cosine similarity between the 196 

embeddings of the original and recalled story) were compared across these conditions, showing a trade-off 197 

between efficiency and accuracy in memory in Figure 3a. The gist plus details encoding strikes a balance 198 

between these objectives. 199 

7

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2.1.2 Modelling consolidation and forgetting 200 

In our model sequential memories are initially encoded in the hippocampus in compressed form, reconstructed 201 

by the neocortex through ‘retrieval-augmented generation’ ( 32 ), and then gradually consolidated into a 202 

generative model in neocortex, through prediction error minimisation on the replayed memories. This 203 

provides a mechanism for the training of neural ‘foundation models’ ( 24 ), which can both capture specific 204 

memories and learn more general schematic knowledge to enable problem solving. 205 

500 stories from the ROC Stories dataset ( 66 ) were encoded in the model hippocampus as described 206 

above (here in gist form without additional details for greater interpretability). To simulate consolidation, the 207 

memories were reconstructed from these traces, and the generative network was trained on the result (using 208 

low-rank adaptation; ( 68 )). As the story is consolidated, the neocortex’s reconstruction moves closer to the 209 

encoded story in embedding space (Figure 3b), but distortions in the reconstruction are still observed. (See 210 

Section 2.2 for a more extensive exploration of distortions in our model.) 211 

We also tested semantic memory for the content of the narratives by asking factual questions about 100 212 

stories from the dataset, e.g. ‘Remember the story in which ‘Jane had recently gotten a new job.’ Why did 213 

Jane arrive late on her first day?’. Each prompt contains enough context to pick out a single relevant story, 214 

and the question has an answer in that story. Semantic memory is quantified as the fraction of questions 215 

for which the output is more similar to the correct answer than two alternatives (based on cosine similarity 216 

in embedding space). Performance increases with consolidation, showing that the network does not simply 217 

overfit to the exact text but can abstract semantic information from the story (Figure 3d and Table 3). 218 

To simulate forgetting in the neocortical network, we tested the recall of the consolidated memories as 219 

the network was trained on new stories (representing the consolidation of new memories, in the absence 220 

of hippocampal reminders of the old memories). Over successive stages of new memory consolidation, the 221 

neocortex’s reconstruction moves away from the encoded story in embedding space (Figure 3c). See Table 2 222 

for an example of the same event’s neocortical reconstruction accuracy improving during consolidation and 223 

declining during forgetting. 224 

Putting these results together suggests an account of the inaccuracy of human episodic memory. To start 225 

with, the encoded version of an event is already highly compressed, relying on schemas from the neocortex. 226 

Then as consolidation progresses, memory becomes less dependent on the hippocampal trace, and more 227 

dependent on the neocortical reconstruction. We assume that the hippocampal trace is no longer maintained 228 

once consolidated into neocortex, with consolidation continuing until the trace can be approximately recon-229 

structed by neocortex, rather than until it can be perfectly reconstructed. The consolidated version is therefore 230 

even less accurate than the encoded version. In addition, once fully consolidated into the neocortical model 231 

forgetting occurs due to interference. 232 

8

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 2 : A model of hippocampal-neocortical interactions as retrieval-augmented generation with stories. a) The neocortex generates a gist vector for the narrative, which is encoded in the hippocampus together with unpredictable details. b) Given a query as the input to recall, the neocortex searches the hippocampus for relevant traces, e.g. by finding nearby gist vectors. c) The generative network in neocortex produces an ‘answer’ conditioned on the retrieved hippocampal trace(s). d) Once a story is fully consolidated, the hippocampal trace is no longer needed to approximately reconstruct the event. e) The stages of encoding and recall are shown for an example story from the ROC Stories dataset ( 66 ), with Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 used to simulate the neocortex, and xRAG vectors ( 33 ) representing the conceptual gist. 9

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 3 : Encoding, consolidation and forgetting of narratives (ROC stories ( 66 )). a) The size of the memory trace stored in the model hippocampus (in tokens) and recall accuracy (cosine similarity between original and recalled stories’ embeddings with ‘all-MiniLM-L6-v2’; ( 69 )) for five variants. From left to right: simply imagining the event based on background knowledge, storing only the gist vector, storing the gist vector with one surprising detail, storing the gist vector with three surprising details, and storing the event in full. b-d) How neocortical representations change over time. b) The cosine similarity in embedding space between the neocortical memory and the original story (red), and between the neocortical memory and the replayed version (blue), which is itself a reconstruction of the compressed encoding. As the story is consolidated, the neocortex’s reconstruction moves closer to the encoded story in embedding space. c) As new memories are consolidated into neocortex, forgetting occurs (we assume the hippocampal trace has faded away). Over the course of new memory consolidation (50 new memories per stage), the neocortex’s reconstruction moves away from the encoded story in embedding space. d) Semantic memory accuracy (fraction of 100 questions for which the model’s answer is most similar to the correct answer) before and after consolidation.        

> Stage Recalled text
> Original Tina loved biology. She wanted to be an intern. She wanted to intern for a bio lab. So she applied. To her delight she got it. Encoded (gist vector only) Tina loved biology. She applied for an internship at the lab and got it. She was very excited and worked hard. She was very passionate ... Consolidation (early) Tina loved biology. She was very interested in it and wanted to learn more. She went to the library and checked out a book on biology. Consolidation (late) Tina loved biology. She applied for an internship at the lab and got it. She was very excited and worked hard. She was very passionate ... Forgetting (early) Tina loved biology. She applied for an internship at the lab. She was really nervous. She prepared but was not sure it was enough. Forgetting (late) Tina loved biology. She wanted to be a biologist. She worked very hard in school. She went to a college to get good grades. She got ...

Table 2 : Examples of gist-based encoding, consolidation and forgetting. Text for a randomly selected story across six stages: the original story, the memory as reconstructed from the compressed hippocampal trace, the neocortical memory early and late in consolidation, and the neocortical memory early and late in forgetting. The initially encoded hippocampal memory produces gist-based distortions, and the neocortex gradually learns this event through consolidation, further distorting it. The neocortical memory gradually fades as newly encoded memories interfere. Note that when the story is initially encoded, only the gist (xRAG) vector is stored in the model hippocampus in this simulation, which increases the bias towards prior experience, but in the full model surprising details would be encoded too. 

2.1.3 Changes in memory content over time 233 

The HIPPOCORPUS dataset ( 18 ) contains participants’ written descriptions of recalled autobiographical 234 

events, with a subset of the recalled events retold months later. We analysed it to track how concrete vs. 235 

10 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 4 : How memory content changes over time. a) Memory concreteness, richness in detail, and specificity (as scored by gpt-4o-mini) for the original ROC Stories data ( 66 ), the memories based on the compressed hippocampal encoding, and the memories reconstructed by neocortex alone after consolidation. b) Memory concreteness, richness, and specificity decline as forgetting proceeds. c) As in a) but for original and immediately recalled stories in the Naturalistic Free Recall Dataset (NFRD; ( 19 )). d) As in a) but experimental data for ‘recalled’ stories, and the same stories ‘retold’ at a later date from the HIPPOCORPUS dataset ( 18 ). e) The mean word frequency (across English language text, computed with the ‘wordfreq’ Python library) for words in the original, pre-consolidation, and post-consolidation stories. f) Likewise but experimental data for the NFRD texts. g) The distributions of word frequencies for the categories in e), with means shown as dotted lines and medians and interquartile ranges shown as bars, showing increased use of high frequency words after encoding and consolidation. h) Likewise but experimental data for the NFRD texts. 11 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Question Relevant story Correct answer Incorrect answers Before con-solidation After con-solidation 

Remember the story in which ‘Ava was six years old.’ What did Ava want to learn to do? Answer with aword or short phrase. Ava was six years old. She wanted to learn to swim. Her mom took her to the pool. There, she patiently taught Ava the ba-sics. Soon Ava was paddling all by herself! swim dance, ride a bike Ava wanted to learn to ride a bike. Ava wanted to learn to swim. Remember the story in which ‘Eric and his wife had a daugh-ter named Meg.’ What happened to Eric’s wife? Answer with a word or short phrase. Eric and his wife had a daughter named Meg. Eric’s wife passed away. Eric and Meg were very sad. Eric met a woman and mar-ried her 5 years after his wife died. Meg is now happy with her new stepmother. passed away moved away, got pro-moted The story does not provide information on what happened to Eric’s wife. She passed away. Remember the story in which ‘Jane had re-cently gotten a new job.’ Why did Jane ar-rive late on her first day? Answer with a word or short phrase. Jane had recently gotten a new job. She was nervous about her first day of work. On the first day of work, Jane overslept. Jane ar-rived at work an hour late. Jane did not make a good impression at her new job. overslept traffic, flat tire Traffic delay. Without ad-ditional con-text, this is a common rea-son for arriv-ing late on the first day of a new job. She over-slept. Remember the story in which ‘Andy was in-vited to a Halloween party.’ What color did Andy dye his hair? Answer with a word or short phrase. Andy was invited to a Halloween party. Andy figured that for dra-matic effect, he should color his hair. Since Andy’s costume was green, Andy decided on that color. After the stylist finished the coloring, Andy regretted it. Andy was disappointed with his new, bold, green hair color. green purple, blonde Orange is the color Andy dyed his hair for the Halloween party. Andy dyed his hair green. 

Table 3 : Neocortical semantic memory for particular events is acquired through consolidation. Neocortex-only answers for selected semantic memory questions before and after ten epochs of consolidation of 500 ROC stories ( 66 ). The model neocortex is prompted with the ‘Question’. Its answer is marked as correct if it is more similar to the ‘Correct answer’, as stated in the ‘Relevant story’, than the ‘Incorrect answers’ (as measured by the similarity of their text embeddings). Note that in the full model, semantic memory would rely on RAG before consolidation, with the relevant event retrieved into the context from hippocampus, but here only the neocortical memory is shown. 12 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

abstract, how rich vs. poor in detail, and how specific vs. general memories were for more recent and more 236 

remote episodic memories. We then compared the original, encoded, and consolidated versions of stories in 237 

our simulations using the same metrics. This was achieved by using an LLM as an annotator (gpt-4o-mini 238 

via the OpenAI API). 239 

Figure 4d shows that the more remote memories are less concrete, rich in detail, and specific, in line 240 

with many similar findings. For comparison, we simulated the process of encoding and consolidation in our 241 

model with the ROC Stories dataset ( 66 ) as described above, because the HIPPOCORPUS dataset does not 242 

contain ‘ground truth’ descriptions of the remembered events. Figure 4a shows that the encoded memories are 243 

significantly less concrete, detailed, and specific than the original stories, and the consolidated stories score 244 

even lower on these attributes. In Tables S3 and S4, SI, we show that reduction in these attributes does not 245 

simply reflect less memory being recalled by controlling for length, confirming that there are still significant 246 

differences. In addition, Figures 4e and g show that more commonly used words occur in the remembered 247 

stories. Furthermore, memory concreteness, richness, and specificity decline as forgetting proceeds (Figure 248 

4b). 249 

The Naturalistic Free Recall Dataset (NFRD; ( 19 )) consists of transcripts for four stories recalled by more 250 

than one hundred participants each, immediately after listening to the story. We repeated the analysis above 251 

for the original and recalled stories for comparison to the original and encoded versions in our simulation, 252 

observing a similar decrease in those attributes (Figure 4c), and furthermore the use of more common words 253 

in the recalled NFRD stories (Figure 4f and h). (We note that schematisation is not the only explanation 254 

for vocabulary changes; even with a perfect memory for an event, one might paraphrase its content in more 255 

familiar language.) 256 

2.2 Modelling the interplay of semantic and episodic memory in consolidation 257 

Section 2.1 sketched out how narrative memories change over time, but now we explore the effect of 258 

existing schemas on memory in more depth. Here we investigate how the model distorts memories towards 259 

expectations, consistent with human data. 260 

2.2.1 Gist-based distortions and prior experience 261 

In the Bartlett experiment ( 20 ), students heard a story called ‘The War of the Ghosts’ and were asked to recall 262 

it after different time intervals. The recalled story was distorted to be more consistent with the students’ 263 

background knowledge of the world, with distortion increasing over time ( 70 ) (Figure 5b). To simulate 264 

encoding, the story was compressed as described above (here with no poorly predicted details for greater 265 

interpretability). To simulate consolidation, Mistral 7B was then trained on its own reconstruction of the 266 

encoded story. Recall of the story was explored by giving the network its first few words (‘One night two 267 

young men from Egulac’), and inspecting the predicted continuation. The consolidated story displayed even 268 

more distortion than the encoded version (Figure 5e), suggesting that consolidation of a compressed memory 269 

is an ‘approximation of an approximation’. 270 

To explore the effect of the model’s ‘priors’ (i.e. its expectations based on previous learning) on recall 271 

of narratives, the Bartlett story ( 20 ) was consolidated after pre-training on ‘background data’. A dataset of 272 

Wikipedia content ( 71 ) was used, with five categories of article selected (‘Politics’, ‘Health’, ‘Universe’, 273 

‘Sport’, and ‘Nature’). The training data for each model was made up of 1000 articles sampled from the 274 

relevant category (with the first 1000 characters of each article taken). The model was trained for 10 epochs 275 

on this dataset, where each epoch is one full presentation of the training set. Next, the Bartlett story was 276 

consolidated into the network in the same way (with the original story used for training to isolate the impact 277 

of consolidation rather than encoding). The temperature for sampling continuations from the model was also 278 

varied between 0 and 1.5 (see Section S1.1.2). 279 

13 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

When the Bartlett story is ‘consolidated’ into the generative network memory distortions are observed, 280 

as in the human data (see Table 4). Distortions in recalled stories reflect the ‘priors’ of the generative 281 

network. The word clouds in Figure 5g show that new words added to the story (i.e. ‘semantic intrusions’) 282 

are representative of the background dataset used, and Figure 5a and c show that the recalled stories move 283 

closer towards the background dataset in text embedding space. See also Table 4 for selected examples 284 

of semantic intrusions from the five models. Whilst distortion occurs even with ‘greedy decoding’, more 285 

‘semantic intrusions’ are observed at higher temperatures, as Figure 5d and Table S5 show. 286 

2.2.2 Event extension and contraction 287 

Distortions can apply to the structure as well as the content of narratives. Event extension is the tendency to 288 

extend certain events in memory, while event contraction is the tendency to curtail them. Raykov et al. ( 21 )289 

demonstrate this with three types of video: complete videos end at a natural event boundary, incomplete 290 

videos are curtailed before this point, and updated videos are extended beyond it. They find that incomplete 291 

videos are often extended in memory (extension errors), while updated videos are often shortened (omission 292 

errors), and show that this is observed at long and short delays (Figure 5h). 293 

We simulate the effect of consolidation in ( 21 ), using simple stories in text form ( 72 ). The majority are 294 

‘typical’ stories, unmodified from the ROC Stories ( 72 ) dataset, whereas an ‘incomplete’ story has characters 295 

removed, and an ‘updated’ story has characters added, so it continues beyond its natural ending. The data 296 

consisted of 200 typical stories, 200 incomplete stories, and 200 updated stories, where ‘updated’ and 297 

‘incomplete’ stories are all the same length. First the stories were encoded in compressed form as described 298 

above, and pre-consolidation recall was tested by giving the first 150 characters of each story as a query 299 

for retrieval-augmented generation. Then the reconstructions of these compressed memories were replayed 300 

to simulate consolidation; Mistral 7B ( 29 ) was fine-tuned on the reconstructed stories for three epochs, and 301 

its recall tested. Both before and after consolidation, omission errors are more common in updated than 302 

incomplete stories, while extension errors are more common in incomplete than updated ones (Figure 5i). By 303 

bringing the story to a more natural conclusion or by removing an incongruous ending, the stories are made 304 

more similar to the network’s expectations. See Table 4 for examples. This mirrors findings on boundary 305 

extension and contraction in memory for images ( 73, 74 ); in both cases, memories are distorted towards a 306 

prior encoded in the network by its previous ‘experience’, consistent with Bayesian views of memory ( 27,52 ). 307 

2.3 Neocortical learning of sequential structure for problem solving 308 

Next we investigate how consolidation develops generalisable knowledge which supports problem solving. 309 

To enable simulations of training from scratch, we use a smaller LLM architecture, GPT-2 Medium ( 23 ), 310 

and simplify the model by storing memories in full rather than compressed form. 311 

The ability to anticipate future observations improves with consolidation ( 75–77 ), leading to downstream 312 

improvements on a diverse range of tasks even as perceptual details fade. We demonstrate how the neocortical 313 

network can extract sequential structure from memories through consolidation using the example of structural 314 

inference, which also the model’s application to non-linguistic stimuli. A spatial example of structural 315 

inference is the finding of shortcuts, as this relies on the common structure of space, and a non-spatial 316 

example is inferring that A is the grandfather of C from the knowledge that A is the father of B, and B is the 317 

father of C, which relies on the common structure of family trees. The relations in these tasks can be seen 318 

as edges in graphs, so that multiple tasks with a common transition structure can be simulated using a fixed 319 

graph with different nodes for each task ( 22 ). 320 

We simulate how consolidation enables structural inference by the neocortical network. We consider 321 

inference in two types of graph: a spatial graph and a simple family tree graph (as in ( 22 )). We trained 322 

GPT-2 models on random walks on these graphs, corresponding to sequences of observations encoded in the 323 

14 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 5 : The effect of prior knowledge on narrative distortions. a) The neocortical network (pre-trained Mistral 7B) is fine-tuned on Wikipedia content ( 71 ) from each of five categories plus the Bartlett ( 20 ) story, (with the original rather than compressed version ‘replayed’ to isolate the effect of consolidation in parts a, c-e, and g). The embeddings of the training data plus the recalled stories for each model (at a temperature of 0.5) are obtained, using ‘all-MiniLM-L6-v2’ ( 69 ). These embeddings are projected into 2D with PCA, showing that recall moves each story towards that network’s training data. b) Data reproduced from the Bergman and Roediger ( 70 ) replication of Bartlett ( 20 ) showing that the fraction of recalled propositions in the story with major distortions (defined as showing semantic influences) increases at greater delays in a repeated reproduction experiment. c) The cosine distance (1 - cosine similarity) between the mean embedding for each category and the original story (purple) and recalled stories (orange). Recalled stories become more similar to the background dataset. Error bars give the SEM for the 200 recalled stories sampled. d) The effect of temperature on the number of new words in the recalled Bartlett stories (‘semantic intrusions’). Error bars give the SEM. Results are for the model at epoch five. e) The effect of epoch on the number of new words in the recalled Bartlett stories, where an epoch is one presentation of the entire training dataset. Error bars give the SEM. Results use a temperature of 0.5. f) The mean cosine distance between the recalled and original stories before and after consolidation (at a temperature of 0.5, and with ten epochs of consolidation). g) Word clouds showing ‘semantic intrusions’ (produced with the ‘wordcloud’ Python package) at a temperature of 0.5, aggregated across five trials. h) Event extension and contraction results, showing omission errors and extension errors after long (left) and short (right) retention intervals, adapted from Raykov et al. ( 21 ) with permission. i) The proportion of stories (200 per type) recalled with omission and extension errors, both before consolidation (cf. short delay in h) and after (cf. long delay). As in part h), error bars give the 95% confidence intervals of the mean. 15 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

a) Semantic intrusions in consolidated memory reflect priors Nature The intruders lit a fire and started eating berries. a great herd of caribou . . . crossed the river The Orcas were hunting humans that night. 

Health The young men ran home and told this to their people and the doctor was called While they were crossing the river in their canoe, it overturned and both men were drowned. The spirits gave the two youths gifts, including a powerful medicine pipe 

Sport [He] took up his bow and arrow, for he was the greatest hunter of the world Men selected, not only for their bravery, but for their swimming ability . . . They were good hunters. 

Politics [They] decided to join their forces and fight against the common enemy the man who was in charge . . . addressed them in their own dialect —The boy’s father, who was a chief, sent his people away to hide 

Universe He told them how the moon came to be and how the stars got their positions in the sky. It told of how the world was once covered in water, then the land appeared They saw in a dream a vast multitude of stars falling from the sky. 

b) Event extension and contraction examples before consolidation Type Original Recalled Typical Stephen wanted a cardigan for his birthday. Sally bought one for him. She wrapped it up. She wrote a note. She gave it to him! The end. Stephen wanted a cardigan for his birthday. Sally bought one for him. She wrapped it up. She wrote a note and gave it to him! The end. 

Incomplete Floyd was enjoying a summer day of inspecting cicada shells. He found many of them and hung them on his shirt like decorations. He squatted at a large tree’s roots when he spotted a really nice one. When he picked it up, t The end. Floyd was enjoying a summer day of inspecting cicada shells. He found many of them and hung them on his shirt like decorations. He squatted at a large tree’s roots when he spotted a really nice cicada. He decided to add it to his collection. The end. 

Updated Kris lost her job. She was sad at first. She looked for a new job. She got an interview. Kris got a new job! Jack had always wanted his own dinosaur. He asked Santa Claus for one every year. He never would get one and beca The end. Kris lost her job. She was sad at first. She looked for a new job. After an interview Kris got a new job! The end. 

Table 4 : Examples of the effects of prior knowledge on narrative distortion. a) Extracts from retrievals of the Bartlett ( 20 ) story for networks trained on different categories of prior knowledge (temperature = 1.0), showing how semantic intrusions reflect the priors of the generative network. b) Event extension and contraction examples before consolidation showing the effect of encoding with compression. The selected incomplete and updated stories (which are of the same length) display extension and omission errors respectively. The model is prompted with the first 150 characters of each story. hippocampus, and then tested the models’ inference abilities on novel sequences with the same underlying 324 

structure. 325 

In the spatial graph, a three-by-three grid represents a simple 2D environment, where the nine nodes are 326 

locations and the edges between them (‘NORTH’, ‘EAST’, ‘SOUTH’ and ‘WEST’) are possible movements 327 

(Figure 6a). Whilst each graph’s structure is the same, nodes are labelled with names (random pairs of letters) 328 

to represent arbitrary features at a particular location. Trajectories through the environment are walks on the 329 

resulting directed graph, which are represented as strings such as ‘ab EAST wd SOUTH ea WEST hn’. (See 330 

graph transformers for an alternative approach ( 78 ).) 331 

The family tree graph has a simple structure for illustrative purposes, consisting of two children, their par-332 

ents, and two sets of grandparents. See Figure 6c. We model this as a directed graph with edges ‘PARENT OF’, 333 

‘CHILD OF’, ‘SPOUSE OF’, ‘SIBLING OF’, ‘GRANDPARENT OF’, and ‘GRANDCHILD OF’. As in the 334 

spatial case, all graphs have the same structure, but each graph has different names assigned to its nodes. 335 

Walks on the graph are represented by strings such as ‘lk PARENT OF nd SIBLING OF re’. 336 

16 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

In each case, we created 100,000 graphs with the same structure but randomly chosen labels (pairs of 337 

letters) for the nodes. 20 random walks, of a number of transitions sampled from between 1 and 50, were 338 

gathered from each graph to create the training data, representing sequences of observations that might be 339 

experienced, encoded in the hippocampus, then replayed offline. GPT-2’s medium-sized architecture was 340 

then trained from scratch for one epoch (i.e. the full dataset was presented once). After training, we tested 341 

inference of the next node given the sequence so far, using greedy decoding of the output probabilities. For 342 

example, the next item after ‘uq NORTH sx EAST tp SOUTH ec WEST’ can be inferred to be ‘uq’, and 343 

the next item after ‘qk PARENT OF xm PARENT OF vw GRANDCHILD OF zq SPOUSE OF’ can be 344 

inferred to be ‘qk’. The sequences used for testing were sequences of relationships in new family trees or 345 

spatial grids. 346 

Figure 6e and f show the ‘loss’ (aggregated error on the training data) of the spatial and family tree models 347 

respectively. In both cases the loss gradually decreases, indicating improved ability to predict the next node 348 

on the set of graphs used for training, which corresponds to the consolidation of previous experience. Tables 349 

S6 and S7 and Figure 6g show good performance on a range of novel structural inference tasks, involving 350 

sets of labels representing environments which have not been experienced before. Simpler inferences include 351 

inferring that going one step west then east takes one back to the original location, e.g. the correct continuation 352 

of ‘ab EAST cd WEST’ is ‘ab’. Similarly, a correct continuation of ‘ab PARENT OF cd CHILD OF’ is 353 

‘ab’. But surprisingly complex inferences are also possible, e.g. that ‘kh CHILD OF oi SPOUSE OF tv 354 

CHILD OF fh SPOUSE OF xr GRANDPARENT OF gq SIBLING OF’ is followed by ‘kh’. Furthermore 355 

given a single new item the trained spatial model can ‘imagine’ new trajectories consistent with the learned 356 

graph structure (Figure 6i). We also tested inference on larger grids than the model was trained on to show 357 

that inference cannot solely be attributed to ‘rote memory’ of sequences of transitions (Figure 6h). 358 

2.3.1 Inference from memory as retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) 359 

Episodic memories can be combined with general knowledge to support problem solving. Next we simulate 360 

how the generative network and hippocampal network could work together to achieve this via RAG. 361 

In the simulations above, inference was tested as the continuation of a single new sequence in working 362 

memory. However working memory is limited ( 16, 17 ), so the brain must selectively recall relevant ex-363 

periences. In addition, problem solving can synthesise information from more than one episodic memory 364 

retrieved from hippocampus; multiple fragments of information encoded at different times can be recombined 365 

with semantic knowledge, e.g. when inferring that A is the sibling of C from the observation on one day that 366 

A is the child of B, and on another that B is the parent of C. 367 

We create a ‘toy example’ of retrieval-augmented generation using the two models in the structural 368 

inference results above, and consider a task in which multiple memories, from recent tasks which have 369 

not yet been consolidated, are required to infer the right answer (Figure 6j). For example, from the pair of 370 

memories ‘ab EAST cd SOUTH ef’ and ‘ef WEST gh’, it can be inferred that ‘gh NORTH ab’. 200 such 371 

tasks were created for each of the spatial and family tree experiments. To simulate RAG, the top two matches 372 

to the query (e.g. ‘gh NORTH ?’) are first retrieved from the model hippocampus. Then the model neocortex 373 

predicts the solution to the query with these retrieved sequences in context. We compare this to baselines 374 

of RAG with a single memory, the hippocampus only solution (randomly selecting one of the locations / 375 

people in the retrieved sequences), and the neocortex only solution (conditioning the generative network on 376 

the task alone, without retrieving sequences from the hippocampus). The results show that RAG supports 377 

structural inference based on hippocampal memories, whereas relying on either the hippocampal network or 378 

generative network alone gives worse results, and that the model can solve problems using information from 379 

multiple episodes (Figure 6k). 380 

17 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 6 : Learning structural regularities. a-b) The spatial graph task. a) Spatial trajectories are modelled as walks on the graph, and represented as strings. b) Structural inference is tested as the ability to complete sequences on unseen graphs based on structural regularities, e.g. inferring that the next location in the sequence shown is ‘jn’. c-d) As above but for the family tree graph task. e) The training and validation losses (i.e. aggregated prediction errors) of GPT-2 trained for one epoch on sequences from 100,000 spatial graphs. f) As above but for the family tree graph task. g) Inference, as shown in parts b) and d), was tested using sequences from novel environments / family trees in which the final entity can be inferred from the sequence so far. Performance is grouped by the number of transitions. Error bars give the SEM. h) Generalisation to different grid sizes. The spatial inference model - trained on paths in a 3x3 grid of locations - was tested on a range of square grid sizes (from 2x2 to 6x6), and generalises beyond its training data. i) The fraction of ‘imagined’ spatial trajectories (as generated by the spatial inference model when given a random location as an input) which are structurally valid, at a range of temperatures. A sequence is marked as invalid if different locations are found at the same inferred co-ordinates (e.g. ‘sz WEST eq EAST zr’). j) RAG applied to an inference task. Relevant sequences are retrieved from the hippocampus, and then provided as input to the generative network together with the new task. k) Inference accuracy for the spatial and family tree inference tasks with RAG, in both a single-memory and multi-memory mode, and a hippocampus (HPC) only and neocortex (NC) only baseline for comparison. 18 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2.3.2 Inspecting the hidden representations supporting inference 381 

To understand how the neocortical network generalises to a new set of labels, we inspected representations 382 

in its hidden layers. Activations (vectors of length 1024) for each token of a random walk were extracted 383 

from the innermost layer (i.e. the 12th of the 24 transformer blocks) of the model neocortex trained in the 384 

spatial task above, and from the same layer of the GPT-2 medium model pre-trained on language and released 385 

by ( 23 ) as a baseline. Having obtained a vector for each location, we analysed the distances between these 386 

representations. We found that the nearer the points in the environment, the closer their hidden representations 387 

(Figure 7f). This is not true of the baseline model (Figure 7e). We then ran principal component analysis 388 

across representations extracted from random walks in many different environments. Figure 7b shows that 389 

our model has learned a shared structure across episodes, whereas this structure is not present in the baseline 390 

GPT-2 medium (Figure 7a); the same is true of the family tree model, in which the three ‘generations’ in the 391 

tree are separated in our model (Figure 7d) but not in the baseline model (Figure 7c). 392 

These results mirror the finding that a shared abstract representation of different spatial tasks with the 393 

same structure develops in cortex through consolidation, as has been shown using cross-map repetition 394 

suppression effects in fMRI ( 79 ). Once this abstraction of the task has developed, it supports reasoning 395 

based on information in the prompt, or ‘in-context learning’. The correlation between distance in the grid 396 

and distance between the representations increases with the length of a random walk on a new graph, but is 397 

high from the outset, suggesting the model can rapidly align new stimuli to its learned map (Figure 7h). 398 

# 3 Discussion 399 

We set out to address three questions: how episodic memory shapes semantic memory, how semantic mem-400 

ory shapes episodic memory, and how the two systems interact to provide complementary contributions to 401 

memory and problem solving. We hypothesise that semantic knowledge emerges from learning to reconstruct 402 

episodes; that episodic memory, which must use neocortical representations for input and output, is com-403 

pressed using semantic knowledge and therefore shares its biases; and that specific episodic information is 404 

combined with general semantic knowledge in working memory for memory retrieval and problem solving. 405 

We propose that neocortical memory takes the form of a generative network, trained to reconstruct 406 

sequential events replayed by the hippocampus. This enables the network to acquire generalisable semantic 407 

knowledge through consolidation, to reconstruct episodes efficiently from highly compressed hippocampal 408 

traces, and eventually to capture specific events. During recall, the hippocampus retrieves episodic details 409 

which serve as context for the neocortical network to generate predictions based on semantic knowledge. 410 

Over time, consolidation allows the neocortex to reconstruct memories independently, reducing reliance on 411 

hippocampal traces. Likewise, episodic memories guide problem solving by providing relevant context from 412 

the hippocampus for neocortical generation. 413 

In our simulations the neocortical generative network interacts with stored sequences retrieved from the 414 

hippocampus as retrieval-augmented generation, but with the neocortex gradually trained on memories from 415 

the hippocampus through consolidation, and the hippocampus storing memories in a highly compressed 416 

form which can be decoded by the neocortex. Furthermore the stored traces in the hippocampus can combine 417 

surprising details with gists in vector form, binding together information at different levels of abstraction in 418 

memory. 419 

This model suggests an explanation for several features of human cognition, such as the bidirectional 420 

influences between episodic and semantic memory; semantic memory is acquired by learning to reconstruct 421 

episodic memories, but also shapes the representation of these episodes, both in terms of their initial 422 

encoding, as reflected by the compressed representations observed in hippocampus ( 45 ), and their gradual 423 

schematisation ( 20 ). To support this, we demonstrated how distortions arise in narratives due to their encoding 424 

in compressed form, then increase with consolidation and subsequent forgetting, and compared changes in 425 

19 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 7 : Inference is supported by learned neocortical hidden representations. a-b) Representations in the spatial inference model. Activations for each token of a random walk were extracted from the middle layer (12) to obtain a vector for each location. Principal component analysis was performed across representations extracted from random walks in many different environments (upper row), colouring each location by its co-ordinates in the environment, so that points with the same colour are different nodes which occupy the same position in the 3x3 grid (see example environments below, where dotted lines indicate possible transitions). GPT-2 medium pretrained on language is shown in a) and our model - GPT-2 medium trained on structural inference - in b). c-d) As above but in the family tree inference model. Here three colours indicate the three generations in the family tree. e) In the GPT-2 medium baseline, there is little relationship between Manhattan distance in the environment and Euclidean distance in token space. f) As in e) but for our model, showing that the token representations reflect distances in the environment. g) The Pearson correlation between Manhattan distance in the environment and Euclidean distance in each layer of our model (red) and GPT-2 medium (blue). h) The Pearson correlation between Manhattan distance in the environment and Euclidean distance in layer 12 for prompt lengths differing in number of transitions, for our model (red) and pre-trained GPT-2 medium (blue). 20 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 8 : A schematic of our model’s predictions compared to alternative baselines (considering our model with hippocampal forgetting, which is not simulated in the main results). Our model predicts distorted memory from the outset, with the recalled version decreasing in similarity to the original experience (a) and increasing in similarity to priors (b), and compressed encoding with hippocampal contributions to memory decreasing over time (c). Compressed encoding within hippocampus, through use of neocortical representations, explains distortions in newly encoded memories, while consolidation into neocortex ex-plains the increasing similarity to prior experience over time. Furthermore, memories of typical events with well-learned neocortical schemas can be compressed more than surprising events (c). Neocortex and hip-pocampus collaborate in novel problem solving, with neocortical contributions increasing and hippocampal contributions decreasing with consolidation (d). memory over time to human data (Section 2.1). We also showed how memory reflects priors in the generative 426 

model derived from previous experience (Section 2.2). Our model also explains how a number of capabilities 427 

improve through consolidation, in addition to the memorisation of ‘replayed’ sequences. In particular, the 428 

neocortical generative network supports problem solving, e.g. in relational inference tasks, by learning an 429 

implicit structure underlying observations (Section 2.3). 430 

In recent years, neuroscience has seen a move from a modular view of many semi-independent networks 431 

learning particular tasks to a focus on the learning of multipurpose representations. Similarly, there has 432 

been a transition in machine learning from task-specific models to larger task-general ones trained through 433 

self-supervised learning, sometimes referred to as ‘foundation models’ ( 24 ). The use of a self-supervised 434 

task - simply the prediction of the next item in the sequence - to train such models is key to their scaling, as 435 

external supervision is not required. We can think of the brain as learning neural ‘foundation models’ too, and 436 

this paper suggests how memory consolidation could contribute to their development (see also ( 27 )). This 437 

view aligns with the growing consensus that prediction error minimisation is key to biological intelligence 438 

(e.g. ( 80 )), neuroimaging evidence of large task-general networks (e.g. ( 81 )), and the relative lack of external 439 

supervision in learning. We do not argue that modern LLMs mirror the brain, but that some kind of neural 440 

‘foundation model’ being trained to minimise prediction error on replayed sequences, and used in conjunction 441 

with specific memories, provides a good model for a wide range of data on memory, inference and planning. 442 

See Figure 8 for a summary of the model’s predictions. 443 

3.1 Limitations and future work 444 

This work is primarily a model of psychological, rather than neural, data. More could be done to bridge 445 

the gap between these ideas and the growing understanding of sequence representations at a neural level. 446 

For example, the model allows consideration of navigation, which is associated with distinctive cell types 447 

such as place, grid and head-direction cells, so the connection between these different levels of explanation 448 

could be explored (see ( 22, 82–85 )). There is a trade-off between the complexity of the behaviour that can be 449 

21 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

simulated and our ability to understand the inner workings of the model. However, progress in ‘mechanistic 450 

interpretability’ (e.g. ( 86 )) enables the hidden layer activations of LLMs to be compared to neuroimaging 451 

data, allowing future comparison of representations at a population level. 452 

LLMs are trained on a simple next item prediction task ( 23 ), mirroring how prediction error minimisation 453 

is thought to drive biological learning ( 80 ). But even if the objective is shared, the implementations may be 454 

very different. In particular, error backpropagation - which calculates each parameter’s ‘responsibility’ for 455 

the network’s error - is thought to be implausible because of its non-local nature ( 87 ). More biologically 456 

plausible approximations to error backpropagation do exist ( 87 ), as well as other families of network that 457 

mimic the brain more closely ( 80, 88, 89 ), which could be explored in future work. 458 

We draw on a body of research connecting memory and schema formation ( 8, 12, 90 ). The SLIMM 459 

framework ( 8) suggests that whilst high prediction error memory elements may be preferentially encoded 460 

in hippocampus, schema congruent information may be remembered more easily by cortex. Consistent with 461 

this account, our model could predict a U-shaped relationship between surprise and recall performance, in 462 

which moderately surprising elements - those not unpredictable enough to be encoded in detail, nor familiar 463 

enough to be captured by existing schema - are especially prone to forgetting (see ( 91 )). Whilst we show 464 

that memories become more schema congruent overall in our simulations, and propose a mechanism for the 465 

storage of surprising details in hippocampus, we do not model how the retention of different aspects of a 466 

memory depends on their predictability, and how this changes over time. Future research could compare our 467 

model’s predicted pattern of memorability as a function of schema congruence with these data. 468 

Memories bind together neocortical representations, with anterior hippocampus connected to anterior 469 

neocortical regions capturing more conceptual content, and posterior hippocampus connected to posterior 470 

neocortical regions capturing more sensory content; consolidation is associated with growing dependence 471 

on the former ( 46 ). If the gist is associated with anterior neocortex, future work could test the prediction 472 

that the more schema congruent an episodic memory, the greater the dependence on anterior as opposed to 473 

posterior hippocampus. 474 

A related issue that could be explored further is how the hippocampal encoding evolves over time. 475 

In our model, hippocampal traces are assumed to fade once the neocortical network can approximately 476 

reconstruct an event, but this is not simulated explicitly. A complexity of this process is that the stored gist 477 

representation must be ‘in sync’ with the neocortical model to be decompressed correctly, so as neocortex 478 

changes the gist would drift from its original meaning, which could be another factor leading to hippocampal 479 

forgetting. Long-term retention of hippocampal traces might therefore require some mechanism to preserve 480 

the correspondence between conceptual representations in hippocampus and in cortex ( 92 ). A separate 481 

question is whether different elements of a hippocampal trace decay uniformly, or whether details might fade 482 

away once they become more predictable, with the gist representation the last element to be forgotten. 483 

Whilst experience is continuous, it is discretised into events in memory ( 93, 94 ), a process known as 484 

event segmentation. Event segmentation is thought to be based on prediction error ( 95–97 ) (but see ( 98 )485 

for an alternative account). Whilst the sequences used in our simulations are ‘pre-segmented’ for simplicity, 486 

this is potentially consistent with our model, as the generative network can provide an ongoing measure of 487 

‘surprise’ during perception ( 40, 96, 97, 99 ), e.g. as quantified by perplexity ( 23 ). Future work could explore 488 

the connections between these ideas. 489 

Human learning can display leaps of insight (e.g. ( 100 )), with abrupt improvements thought to correspond 490 

to the reorganisation of mental representations ( 101 ). Future work could explore the development of an LLM’s 491 

internal representations as a task is learned, comparing this to the corresponding ‘behavioural’ changes, to 492 

see if sudden increases in performance correspond to sudden representational changes. This could then be 493 

compared to the dynamics of learning in humans. 494 

Future research could also explore how retrieval, encoding, and replay processes are orchestrated. We 495 

simplify matters by using pre-segmented sequences, encoding every event with a fixed level of detail, and 496 

‘hard-coding’ when the hippocampus is queried. However, one could train a ‘meta-controller’ to co-ordinate 497 

22 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

these processes with reinforcement learning ( 102 ). This might learn to use different cognitive resources 498 

when it was optimal to do so, e.g. prioritising memories for replay to maximise future performance, and 499 

only encoding memories when it is worth the cognitive cost. This could build on previous studies like ( 103 ), 500 

which prototypes these ideas with simpler models. 501 

Finally, catastrophic forgetting refers to the overwriting of old knowledge by new knowledge when 502 

a neural network learns multiple tasks or distributions consecutively ( 104 ). Whilst gradual forgetting is 503 

expected in cognition, catastrophic forgetting is a more dramatic interference of new with old knowledge, 504 

which is not typically observed. The LLM’s gradient of forgetting in Section 2.1.2 is steeper than would be 505 

expected of human memory, suggesting that the brain has mechanisms for maintaining neocortical memories 506 

over the course of a lifetime that LLMs do not. Future research could investigate these mechanisms, e.g. 507 

whether generative replay in neocortex might facilitate continual learning ( 92, 105 ). 508 

3.2 Episodic and semantic memory 509 

In our model episodic and semantic memory combine to reconstruct the past and predict the future, but how 510 

clear is this distinction? If a series of narratives representing ‘episodes’ are ‘consolidated’ into the neocortical 511 

LLM, the resulting LLM could support both memory for specific episodes ( 28 ) and for semantic ‘facts’, with 512 

the latter learned as a side-effect of reconstructing the former. Not only are ‘beliefs’ influenced by ‘episodes’ 513 

the network was trained on, but the ‘episodes’ are reshaped by the ‘beliefs’, as we saw in a range of memory 514 

distortion simulations. This can be the case even for the initial hippocampal encoding of episodes in the full 515 

model, as demonstrated in Section 2.1. 516 

How do we distinguish remote memory from imagination, if both consist largely of schema-based 517 

predictions from a generative model? The generative model’s prediction error for sequences from the 518 

training data tends to be lower than for novel sequences ( 106 ), so the generative network could provide a 519 

measure of recognition memory even if the original hippocampal trace has faded away. However this might 520 

correspond to a ‘sense of familiarity’ rather than definitive knowledge that a stimulus was experienced. 521 

Thus, the presence of similar real memories ( 61, 62 ), or the rehearsal of imagined events ( 107 ), can induce 522 

false memory, presumably from a ‘sense of familiarity’ in the generative network. This could align with 523 

hippocampal amnesics’ sometimes preserved ability to make relative judgements of familiarity ( 108 ). 524 

On the other hand, episodic memories arguably need to include some details from a hippocampal trace 525 

to be recognised confidently ( 108, 109 ). Memories may retain some limited trace in the hippocampus proper 526 

for a long time, so the retrieval of event-unique details which have not yet been consolidated could help 527 

to distinguish real memories from imagination. The neocortical network may contain many semantic facts 528 

relating to one’s personal history, e.g. that one went on a holiday to a particular place as a child, and could 529 

thus construct events consistent with these facts. However, if episodic recollection requires retrieval of unique 530 

details encoded during the event, then even an accurate reconstruction might be considered a ‘semanticized’ 531 

memory rather than a truly episodic one (e.g. ( 7)). 532 

3.3 Conclusion 533 

We have proposed a model of the bidirectional interactions between episodic and semantic memory, in which 534 

semantic memory in neocortex relies on a generative network, trained to reconstruct sequential events replayed 535 

by the hippocampus. Episodic memories are encoded in the hippocampus in compressed form optimised 536 

for efficient neocortical reconstruction, and recalled by ‘decompressing’ these traces with the generative 537 

network. In other words, hippocampus and neocortex work together in encoding, recall, and problem solving 538 

to provide episodic details and predictions from semantic knowledge based on these details respectively. 539 

During consolidation, these reconstructions are then replayed to update the neocortical generative network 540 

to predict the next item in each sequence. We make use of recent advances in the large language model 541 

23 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

literature to simulate this hippocampo-neocortical interaction as ‘retrieval-augmented generation’ (RAG), 542 

with the addition of mechanisms to compress episodic memories and to consolidate them into the generative 543 

network. This model explains changes in the characteristics of autobiographical memories over time, and 544 

accounts for gist or schema-based distortions. As well as capturing the gist of specific episodes, the neocortical 545 

network extracts statistical patterns that generalise to new situations. We also show how the hippocampal and 546 

neocortical networks could jointly contribute to problem solving through RAG, allowing memories retrieved 547 

from the hippocampus to provide the context for prediction using the ‘general knowledge’ of the neocortical 548 

network. We demonstrate that, by simply learning to predict the next item, the neocortical network can 549 

acquire abstracted knowledge of commonalities across experience, which can be used to support inference 550 

and planning. 551 

24 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# 4 Methods 552 

4.1 Large language models 553 

Our simulations use large language models (LLMs), which are neural networks trained to predict the next 554 

item in a sequence based on preceding items ( 23 ). Most commonly, the sequence is text and the items are 555 

small chunks of characters (or ‘tokens’). These models operate autoregressively: given a partial sequence, 556 

they estimate a probability distribution over possible next items. Training consists of adjusting the network’s 557 

parameters so that it assigns high probability to the actual next item observed in the data, a procedure known 558 

as causal language modelling. 559 

Once trained, the model can be used to generate new sequences by repeatedly predicting and selecting the 560 

next item. The simplest approach is greedy decoding, in which the most probable next item is always selected, 561 

but sequences can also be generated by sampling from the model’s predicted probability distribution, with 562 

a temperature parameter controlling how variable the output is. Higher temperatures increase variability by 563 

flattening the distribution, while lower temperatures favour the most likely continuations. 564 

Most LLMs use a mechanism called attention ( 110 ), which allows each element to be enriched by 565 

‘attending to’ information earlier in the sequence. This matches the intuition that the meaning of a word is 566 

understood in the context of the text so far, not in isolation as in earlier approaches to text processing with 567 

machine learning. 568 

See Section S1.1, SI, for further details. 569 

4.2 Modelling hippocampal-neocortical interaction as retrieval-augmented generation 570 

4.2.1 The compression and encoding of episodic memory 571 

In Sections 2.1 and 2.2 we use Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 ( 29 ) to explore the compression, encoding, retrieval-572 

augmented generation, consolidation, and forgetting of narrative events. In addition to the LLM itself, 573 

pre-trained weights from ( 33 ) are used to transform episodes into compressed xRAG vectors. In brief, these 574 

weights are trained so that the embedding of the text reconstructed by the LLM is as close as possible 575 

to the embedding of the original. A key advantage is that the underlying idea in ( 33 ) is not specific to 576 

language but could in principle work for arbitrary types of sequence. Note that xRAG weights are only 577 

compatible with a particular LLM; Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 is used because the xRAG weights are trained 578 

to transform embeddings into token representations of this specific model. But in principle the context 579 

compression mechanism could work for any LLM. See Section S1.1.4, SI, for a discussion of alternative 580 

context compression approaches. 581 

To identify surprising details given the xRAG vector, we first segmented the original story into short 582 

clause-like phrases using the spaCy Python library, splitting at (i) sentence boundaries and (ii) commas or 583 

conjunctions. To quantify how unpredictable each candidate phrase 𝑝 is given the gist vector, we scored it by 584 

conditional perplexity. Specifically, we concatenated the gist vector with the candidate phrase and computed 585 

the model’s perplexity. Higher perplexity indicates that the phrase is less predictable from the gist. For a 586 

requested detail level 𝑛 , we selected the top-𝑛 highest-perplexity phrases as the ‘unpredictable details’. 587 

The prompt used to recall a memory with retrieval-augmented generation is as follows, formatted as 588 

suggested in the xRAG ( 33 ) code. Note that the ‘INST’ tag denotes the instruction for Mistral 7B, which is 589 

an instruction-tuned model: 590 

[INST] Refer to the background document and answer the question. 591 

Background: {XRAG TOKEN }592 

Question: {FIRST LINE } What happened (in detail)? 593 

Other details to include: {SURPRISING DETAILS }. [/INST] The answer is: 594 

25 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Here ‘XRAG TOKEN’ is the single token encoding the gist produced by the xRAG projection weights, 595 

and ‘SURPRISING DETAILS’ is a comma-separated list of the n highest perplexity phrases. (The line 596 

beginning ‘Other details’ is omitted from the prompt when no details are provided.) 597 

4.2.2 Modelling the hippocampus 598 

Recall requires both pattern completion of the current item and prediction of the next one. For example, 599 

recalling a day out from a photo requires first retrieving the scene depicted in the photo, and then remembering 600 

the events following and preceding that scene. Modelling sequence memory therefore requires a mechanism 601 

that supports both autoassociative reconstruction of the present state from a partial input and heteroassociative 602 

transitions to future states ( 111 ). 603 

Here this is implemented with a pair of modern Hopfield networks (see Section S1.1.5, SI, for further 604 

details). A standard modern Hopfield network (MHN) retrieves items from their noisy versions ( 31 ), while 605 

an asymmetric MHN ( 112 ) retrieves the next item for a given item. This simple model demonstrates the idea 606 

of combining autoassociative and heteroassociative connectivity in a ‘biologically plausible’ way ( 113 ), but 607 

many alternative implementations of sequence memory exist, e.g. ( 114 ), and could be compatible with this 608 

proposal. In our model, the xRAG gist vector for an event can be retrieved autoassociatively from a cue, 609 

while each token in the sequence of details can be retrieved heteroassociatively from the previous token. 610 

(Note that we consider transitions going forward in time for simplicity, but a fuller model could involve 611 

heteroassociative transitions going backward in time too.) 612 

To encode text as sequences of characters, it is crucial to distinguish between different instances of the 613 

same character, i.e. the correct next character after ‘a’ depends on the letters that precede ‘a’. (Because the 614 

same words feature in different episodes, the history that determines the correct transition stretches back 615 

many characters.) The asymmetric MHN is by default a ‘Markov chain’ model of sequential memory, so it is 616 

necessary to use a state representation that captures the history. This is based on previous work involving the 617 

role of temporal context in memory ( 36, 115 ). Here we simply add a decaying representation of the previous 618 

item to a given item’s representation, with the weighting of the previous item set by a decay constant. 619 

In summary, each element of a sequence is represented by a state vector, which consists of the current 620 

state plus a decaying trace of previous states. In the main text simulations, the first such state is the xRAG 621 

vector, and subsequent states are characters in the string of unpredictable details. (In Section 2.3, which omits 622 

the compression aspect for simplicity, the states are characters in the string.) To describe this in terms of the 623 

Krotov and Hopfield ( 113 ) formulation, the values of each state vector are encoded in the weights to and 624 

from a given memory unit in an MHN, while the asymmetric MHN stores state 𝑛 in incoming weights to a 625 

memory unit, and state 𝑛 + 1 in outgoing weights. Retrieval proceeds in two stages (described with reference 626 

to the main text simulations). First, given a query xRAG vector computed from the query text, the MHN 627 

computes similarities to stored states (Figure S1a), and applies a softmax function with inverse temperature 628 

𝛽 . In the limit of high 𝛽 , this results in autoassociative pattern completion of a single stored state, ideally that 629 

of the stored gist vector. Subsequent elements, corresponding to characters of the unpredictable details, are 630 

then retrieved heteroassociatively, with the output of one retrieval becoming the input to the next. A range of 631 

values of the decay constant described above can give good results (Figure S1b). High 𝛽 is also used here to 632 

retrieve a single next state prediction rather than a superposition (Figure S1c). 633 

Note that we do not model forgetting in the hippocampus, or errors that result from retrieval failures 634 

rather than compressed encoding. The ability to retrieve stored sequences is near perfect for the parameters 635 

chosen, as shown in Figure S1, but future work could explore how retrieval errors in the hippocampus affect 636 

the behaviour of the system. 637 

26 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 9 : Using modern Hopfield networks (MHNs) to model the hippocampus. a) In asymmetric versions of MHNs, the weights between feature and memory units differ, as visualised from the perspective of ( 113 ). b) A sequence of arbitrary symbols, e.g. ‘ab...’, is represented as a sequence of vectors over the feature units, where each vector is the sum of the current state plus the decay rate (here set to 0.9) times the previous state. c) To store a narrative in compressed form, the xRAG vector and details are represented as a series of states, with a decaying trace of previous states. The states are encoded in an MHN, and the state-next state transitions in an asymmetric MHN. In the latter, for each state the return connections from memory units to feature units encode the next state. 

4.2.3 Consolidation of reconstructed episodes 638 

In simulations involving Mistral 7B, the model is fine-tuned in a different way from the ‘usual’ end-to-end 639 

method because of its size. Instead of updating the entire model, parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) 640 

methods update only a small subset of parameters. One such method is low-rank adaptation (LoRA; ( 68 )), 641 

which injects trainable low-rank matrices alongside frozen pre-trained weights. We implement LoRA with 642 

the ‘PEFT’ Python library ( 116 ). 643 

We used a LoRA rank of 𝑟 = 16, scaling parameter 𝛼 = 16, and dropout probability 0 .05. LoRA adapters 644 

were applied to the linear weight matrices used to compute the query, key, value, and output projections in the 645 

attention mechanism, as well as to the gate, up, and down projection matrices of the feed-forward network. 646 

The training data is formatted as follows, in the form recommended for an instruction-tuned model such 647 

as Mistral 7B: 648 

[INST] {FIRST LINE } What happened (in detail)? [/INST] {REST OF STORY }649 

The prompt used to test consolidated episodic memory, i.e. memory without any retrieval from the model 650 

hippocampus, is as follows: 651 

[INST] {FIRST LINE } What happened (in detail)? [/INST] 652 

The prompt used to test consolidated semantic memory is as follows, where the prompt contains enough 653 

context to pick out a single relevant story, and the question has an answer in that story: 654 

[INST] Remember the story in which {FIRST LINE }. {QUESTION } Answer with a word or 655 

short phrase. [/INST] 656 

27 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4.2.4 Analysing the HIPPOCORPUS and NFRD datasets 657 

The HIPPOCORPUS dataset ( 18 ) consists of 2779 recalled stories, 1319 retold ones, and 2756 imagined 658 

ones (not included in these analyses). The Naturalistic Free Recall Dataset (NFRD; ( 19 )) consists of 116 659 

recalls for the ‘pieman’ story, 116 for ‘eyespy’, 113 for ‘pieman’, and 113 for ‘oregontrail’. 660 

The following prompt was used to label the attributes of recalled and retold items in the HIPPOCORPUS 661 

dataset, and of original and recalled items in the NFRD dataset with gpt-4o-mini via the OpenAI API: 662 

Your task is to score text on three metrics: how concrete (vs abstract) it is, how rich in detail it 663 

is, and how specific (vs general) it is. 664 

Return ONLY a JSON dictionary with 3 keys, each a float 0-1: 665 

{‘concrete vs abstract’: 0–1, ‘rich vs poor details’: 0–1, ‘specific vs general’: 0–1 }666 

A higher score corresponds to more concrete, richer in detail, or more specific text. 667 

This reflects standard practices for using LLMs for data annotation ( 117 ). 668 

Simulation Section Training method Model Training data 

Narratives 2.1 Further training with LoRA ( 68 )Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 plus xRAG weights Reconstructed English language text from ROC Stories dataset ( 66 )Gist-based distor-tions 2.2.1 Further training with LoRA ( 68 )Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 plus xRAG weights Reconstructed English language text from (20 ) and Wikipedia ( 71 )Event extension and contraction 2.2.2 Further training with LoRA ( 68 )Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 plus xRAG weights Reconstructed English language text from ROC Stories dataset ( 66 )Structural infer-ence (spatial) 2.3 From scratch (1 epoch with learn-ing rate of 5e-05) GPT-2 medium Walks on a graph of form ‘mv SOUTH sz WEST li EAST sz . . . ’ 20 random walks of length 1-50 transitions on each of 100,000 graphs Structural in-ference (family trees) 2.3 From scratch (1 epoch with learn-ing rate of 5e-05) GPT-2 medium Walks on a graph of form ‘yu GRAND-PARENT OF mi SIBLING OF vb . . . ’ 20 random walks of length 1-50 transitions on each of 100,000 graphs 

Table 5 : Summary of models trained. Here ‘reconstructed’ means the version of the original data recon-structed by the LLM from its compressed encoding. 

4.3 Modelling the interplay of semantic and episodic memory in consolidation 669 

Event extension and contraction are modelled with simple stories in text form, each only a few lines long ( 72 ). 670 

Three types of narrative are used. Some are ‘typical’ stories, unmodified from the ( 72 ) dataset, whereas an 671 

‘incomplete’ story has characters removed, and an ‘updated’ story has characters added, so it continues 672 

beyond its natural ending. Note that this is a challenging task as some stories could be interpreted as either 673 

28 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

incomplete or updated. To disentangle the effect of story category from the effect of length, the incomplete 674 

and updated stories were all the same length. To achieve this, text from a different random story was added 675 

to stories shorter than average, extending them to the mean length, while longer than average stories were 676 

shortened to the mean length. 677 

After encoding and reconstructing the stories, the Mistral 7B model ( 29 ) was fine-tuned on the re-678 

constructions for three epochs and then recall was tested by giving the model the first 150 characters and 679 

observing the output. 680 

4.4 Neocortical learning of sequential structure for inference and planning 681 

In Section 2.3 we train sequence models (GPT-2; ( 23 )) on non-linguistic sequences, choosing a smaller 682 

model to run more extensive simulations of learning structural inference from scratch. The ‘medium’ sized 683 

GPT-2 model is used, which has 345 million parameters including 24 transformer blocks, and is trained from 684 

scratch with randomly initialised weights. See Table 5 for a summary of the models trained. 685 

We simulated how consolidation enables structural inference by the neocortical network, considering the 686 

example of a spatial graph and a simple family tree graph (as in ( 22 )). We trained GPT-2 medium from scratch 687 

on random walks on these graphs, corresponding to sequences of observations encoded in the hippocampus, 688 

and then tested the models’ inference abilities on novel sequences with the same underlying structure. 689 

Note that on some of the family tree inference problems there are multiple possible answers which are 690 

consistent with, but cannot be inferred from, the sequence so far (such as the imagined family member 691 

‘ef’ in ‘ab CHILD OF cd PARENT OF ef’, whereas ‘ab’ is the expected answer), and these are counted as 692 

incorrect, making this quite a harsh performance metric. 693 

We simulate episodic contributions to problem solving as retrieval-augmented generation, using the two 694 

models in the structural inference results above (one trained on spatial graphs, and one on family tree graphs, 695 

such that each has learned the structural regularities of the stimuli). In each case, the hippocampus encodes 696 

sequences from new spatial or family tree graphs, corresponding to observations in a new spatial environment 697 

or of a new family’s relationships. 200 new graphs were constructed for each task, each missing a randomly 698 

chosen edge. Two short walks on each graph, which did not include the missing edge, were stored in the 699 

‘hippocampus’ (simply a list of strings in this example). The two walks were chosen so that solving the task 700 

requires combining information from both , e.g. it requires both ‘ab EAST cd SOUTH ef’ and ‘ef WEST gh’ 701 

to infer that ‘gh NORTH ab’. For each missing edge, a query of the form ‘gh NORTH’ or ‘cd PARENT OF’ 702 

was constructed for the spatial and family tree graphs respectively. Testing involved two stages, retrieval 703 

followed by generation: first the hippocampus is queried for relevant traces, simply by finding sequences 704 

from the same environment or family tree. Then the generative network produces an output conditioned 705 

on the retrieved sequences concatenated with the sequence for the task (Figure 6j), i.e. with the retrieved 706 

sequence and the current task in the LLM’s prompt. Greedy decoding was used to generate predictions. 707 

29 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

# References 

1. W. B. Scoville, B. Milner, Loss of recent memory after bilateral hippocampal lesions. Journal of neurology, neurosurgery, and psychiatry 20 (1), 11 (1957). 2. D. Marr, Simple memory: a theory for archicortex. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. B, Biological Sciences 262 (841), 23–81 (1971). 3. J. L. McClelland, B. L. McNaughton, R. C. O’Reilly, Why there are complementary learning systems in the hippocampus and neocortex: insights from the successes and failures of connectionist models of learning and memory. Psychological review 102 (3), 419 (1995). 4. P. Alvarez, L. R. Squire, Memory consolidation and the medial temporal lobe: a simple network model. 

Proceedings of the national academy of sciences 91 (15), 7041–7045 (1994). 5. J. Robin, M. Moscovitch, Details, gist and schema: hippocampal–neocortical interactions underlying recent and remote episodic and spatial memory. Current opinion in behavioral sciences 17 , 114–123 (2017). 6. V. Samborska, J. L. Butler, M. E. Walton, T. E. Behrens, T. Akam, Complementary task representations in hippocampus and prefrontal cortex for generalizing the structure of problems. Nature Neuroscience 

25 (10), 1314–1326 (2022). 7. M. Moscovitch, L. Nadel, Consolidation and the hippocampal complex revisited: in defense of the multiple-trace model. Current opinion in neurobiology 8 (2), 297–300 (1998). 8. M. T. Van Kesteren, D. J. Ruiter, G. Fern´ andez, R. N. Henson, How schema and novelty augment memory formation. Trends in neurosciences 35 (4), 211–219 (2012). 9. J. L. McClelland, B. L. McNaughton, A. K. Lampinen, Integration of new information in memory: new insights from a complementary learning systems perspective. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 375 (1799), 20190637 (2020). 10. M. A. L. Ralph, E. Jefferies, K. Patterson, T. T. Rogers, The neural and computational bases of semantic cognition. Nature reviews neuroscience 18 (1), 42–55 (2017). 11. O. Bein, C. Gasser, T. Amer, A. Maril, L. Davachi, Predictions transform memories: How expected versus unexpected events are integrated or separated in memory. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 

153 , 105368 (2023). 12. M. J. Sekeres, J. Schomaker, L. Nadel, D. Tse, To update or to create? The influence of novelty and prior knowledge on memory networks. Philosophical Transactions B 379 (1906), 20230238 (2024). 13. C. V. Dong, Q. Lu, K. A. Norman, S. Michelmann, Towards large language models with human-like episodic memory. Trends in Cognitive Sciences (2025). 14. S. J. Gershman, I. Fiete, K. Irie, Key-value memory in the brain. Neuron 113 (11), 1694–1707 (2025). 15. A. Baddeley, Working memory. Science 255 (5044), 556–559 (1992). 16. A. Baddeley, The episodic buffer: a new component of working memory? Trends in cognitive sciences 

4 (11), 417–423 (2000). 30 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17. N. Cowan, The magical number 4 in short-term memory: A reconsideration of mental storage capacity. 

Behavioral and brain sciences 24 (1), 87–114 (2001). 18. M. Sap, E. Horvitz, Y. Choi, N. A. Smith, J. Pennebaker, Recollection versus imagination: Exploring human memory and cognition via neural language models, in Proceedings of the 58th annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (2020), pp. 1970–1978. 19. O. Raccah, P. Chen, T. M. Gureckis, D. Poeppel, V. A. Vo, The “Naturalistic Free Recall” dataset: four stories, hundreds of participants, and high-fidelity transcriptions. Scientific Data 11 (1), 1317 (2024). 20. F. C. Bartlett, Remembering: A study in experimental and social psychology (Cambridge university press) (1932). 21. P. P. Raykov, D. Varga, C. M. Bird, False memories for ending of events. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General (2023). 22. J. C. Whittington, et al. , The Tolman-Eichenbaum machine: Unifying space and relational memory through generalization in the hippocampal formation. Cell 183 (5), 1249–1263 (2020). 23. A. Radford, et al. , Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog 1 (8), 9 (2019). 24. R. Bommasani, et al. , On the opportunities and risks of foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258 (2021). 25. T. Brown, et al. , Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems 33 , 1877–1901 (2020). 26. J. L. McClelland, T. T. Rogers, The parallel distributed processing approach to semantic cognition. 

Nature reviews neuroscience 4 (4), 310–322 (2003). 27. E. Spens, N. Burgess, A generative model of memory construction and consolidation. Nature Human Behaviour pp. 1–18 (2024). 28. N. Carlini, et al. , Quantifying memorization across neural language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.07646 (2022). 29. A. Q. Jiang, et al. , Mistral 7B (2023), https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.06825 .30. W. Sun, M. Advani, N. Spruston, A. Saxe, J. E. Fitzgerald, Organizing memories for generalization in complementary learning systems. Nature neuroscience 26 (8), 1438–1448 (2023). 31. H. Ramsauer, et al. , Hopfield networks is all you need. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.02217 (2020). 32. P. Lewis, et al. , Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33 , 9459–9474 (2020). 33. X. Cheng, et al. , xrag: Extreme context compression for retrieval-augmented generation with one token. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.13792 (2024). 34. D. Li, et al. , Large language models with controllable working memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.05110 (2022). 35. S. M. Polyn, K. A. Norman, M. J. Kahana, A context maintenance and retrieval model of organizational processes in free recall. Psychological review 116 (1), 129 (2009). 31 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

36. M. W. Howard, M. J. Kahana, A distributed representation of temporal context. Journal of mathematical psychology 46 (3), 269–299 (2002). 37. D. G. Nagy, G. Orb´ an, C. M. Wu, Adaptive compression as a unifying framework for episodic and semantic memory. Nature Reviews Psychology pp. 1–15 (2025). 38. Z. Fayyaz, et al. , A model of semantic completion in generative episodic memory. Neural Computation 

34 (9), 1841–1870 (2022). 39. S. J. Gershman, N. D. Daw, Reinforcement learning and episodic memory in humans and animals: an integrative framework. Annual review of psychology 68 (1), 101–128 (2017). 40. Z. Fountas, et al. , Human-like episodic memory for infinite context llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.09450 (2024). 41. J. Zhang, L. Bottou, Memory Mosaics at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.03285 (2025). 42. R. C. Atkinson, R. M. Shiffrin, Human memory: A proposed system and its control processes. The psychology of learning and motivation 2 (1968). 43. D. Marr, A theory for cerebral neocortex. Proceedings of the Royal society of London. Series B. Biological sciences 176 (1043), 161–234 (1970). 44. D. L. Schacter, D. R. Addis, R. L. Buckner, Remembering the past to imagine the future: the prospective brain. Nature reviews neuroscience 8 (9), 657–661 (2007). 45. R. Q. Quiroga, Concept cells: the building blocks of declarative memory functions. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 13 (8), 587–597 (2012). 46. M. J. Sekeres, G. Winocur, M. Moscovitch, The hippocampus and related neocortical structures in memory transformation. Neuroscience letters 680 , 39–53 (2018). 47. J. Piaget, The origins of intelligence in children , vol. 8 (International universities press New York) (1952). 48. G. Buzs´ aki, The hippocampo-neocortical dialogue. Cerebral cortex 6 (2), 81–92 (1996). 49. A. Baddeley, The concept of episodic memory. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences 356 (1413), 1345–1350 (2001). 50. S. K´ ali, P. Dayan, Hippocampally-dependent consolidation in a hierarchical model of neocortex. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 13 (2000). 51. S. K´ ali, P. Dayan, Replay, repair and consolidation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 

15 (2002). 52. P. Hemmer, M. Steyvers, A Bayesian account of reconstructive memory. Topics in Cognitive Science 

1 (1), 189–202 (2009). 53. D. G. Nagy, B. T¨ or¨ ok, G. Orb´ an, Optimal forgetting: Semantic compression of episodic memories. 

PLoS Computational Biology 16 (10), e1008367 (2020). 54. B. B. Doll, K. D. Duncan, D. A. Simon, D. Shohamy, N. D. Daw, Model-based choices involve prospective neural activity. Nature neuroscience 18 (5), 767–772 (2015). 32 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

55. N. D. Daw, S. J. Gershman, B. Seymour, P. Dayan, R. J. Dolan, Model-based influences on humans’ choices and striatal prediction errors. Neuron 69 (6), 1204–1215 (2011). 56. O. Vikbladh, N. Burgess, E. Russek, Systems Consolidation of Sequential Dynamics in Model-Based Planning. bioRxiv (2024). 57. L. Chen, et al. , Decision transformer: Reinforcement learning via sequence modeling. Advances in neural information processing systems 34 , 15084–15097 (2021). 58. B. Millidge, T. Salvatori, Y. Song, T. Lukasiewicz, R. Bogacz, Universal Hopfield networks: A gen-eral framework for single-shot associative memory models, in International Conference on Machine Learning (PMLR) (2022), pp. 15561–15583. 59. H. B. Barlow, et al. , Possible principles underlying the transformation of sensory messages. Sensory communication 1 (01), 217–233 (1961). 60. H. B. Barlow, Unsupervised learning. Neural computation 1 (3), 295–311 (1989). 61. J. Deese, On the prediction of occurrence of particular verbal intrusions in immediate recall. Journal of experimental psychology 58 (1), 17 (1959). 62. H. L. Roediger, K. B. McDermott, Creating false memories: Remembering words not presented in lists. 

Journal of experimental psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 21 (4), 803 (1995). 63. T. Ge, et al. , In-context autoencoder for context compression in a large language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.06945 (2023). 64. M. L. Mack, A. R. Preston, B. C. Love, Ventromedial prefrontal cortex compression during concept learning. Nature communications 11 (1), 1–11 (2020). 65. A. Hahamy, H. Dubossarsky, T. E. Behrens, The human brain reactivates context-specific past in-formation at event boundaries of naturalistic experiences. Nature neuroscience 26 (6), 1080–1089 (2023). 66. N. Mostafazadeh, et al. , A corpus and cloze evaluation for deeper understanding of commonsense stories, in Proceedings of the 2016 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (2016), pp. 839–849. 67. R. Meng, et al. , SFR-Embedding-Mistral:Enhance Text Retrieval with Transfer Learning, Salesforce AI Research Blog (2024), https://www.salesforce.com/blog/sfr-embedding/ .68. E. J. Hu, et al. , Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685 

(2021). 69. N. Reimers, I. Gurevych, Sentence-BERT: Sentence Embeddings using Siamese BERT-Networks, in 

Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (Associ-ation for Computational Linguistics) (2019), https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.10084 .70. E. T. Bergman, H. L. Roediger, Can Bartlett’s repeated reproduction experiments be replicated? Memory & cognition 27 (6), 937–947 (1999). 71. T. Ziad´ e, Wikipedia Topics, https://huggingface.co/datasets/tarekziade/ wikipedia-topics (2024), accessed: 2024-05-31. 33 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

72. H. Rashkin, A. Bosselut, M. Sap, K. Knight, Y. Choi, Modeling naive psychology of characters in simple commonsense stories. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.06533 (2018). 73. H. Intraub, M. Richardson, Wide-angle memories of close-up scenes. Journal of Experimental Psy-chology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 15 (2), 179 (1989). 74. W. A. Bainbridge, C. I. Baker, Boundaries extend and contract in scene memory depending on image properties. Current Biology 30 (3), 537–543 (2020). 75. J. M. Ellenbogen, P. T. Hu, J. D. Payne, D. Titone, M. P. Walker, Human relational memory requires time and sleep. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104 (18), 7723–7728 (2007). 76. D. Kumaran, What representations and computations underpin the contribution of the hippocampus to generalization and inference? Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 6, 157 (2012). 77. H. Tarder-Stoll, C. Baldassano, M. Aly, Consolidation enhances sequential multistep anticipation but diminishes access to perceptual features. Psychological Science p. 09567976241256617 (2024). 78. V. P. Dwivedi, X. Bresson, A generalization of transformer networks to graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.09699 (2020). 79. A. Baram, et al. , An abstract relational map emerges in the human medial prefrontal cortex with consolidation. bioRxiv pp. 2024–10 (2024). 80. K. Friston, The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nature reviews neuroscience 11 (2), 127–138 (2010). 81. M. E. Raichle, et al. , A default mode of brain function. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences 

98 (2), 676–682 (2001). 82. K. L. Stachenfeld, M. M. Botvinick, S. J. Gershman, The hippocampus as a predictive map. Nature neuroscience 20 (11), 1643–1653 (2017). 83. A. Banino, et al. , Vector-based navigation using grid-like representations in artificial agents. Nature 

557 (7705), 429–433 (2018). 84. F. Sch¨ onfeld, L. Wiskott, Modeling place field activity with hierarchical slow feature analysis. Frontiers in computational neuroscience 9, 51 (2015). 85. B. Sorscher, G. C. Mel, S. A. Ocko, L. M. Giocomo, S. Ganguli, A unified theory for the computational and mechanistic origins of grid cells. Neuron 111 (1), 121–137 (2023). 86. T. Bricken, et al. , Towards Monosemanticity: Decomposing Language Models With Dictionary Learning. Transformer Circuits Thread (2023), https://transformer-circuits.pub/2023/monosemantic-features/index.html. 87. J. C. Whittington, R. Bogacz, Theories of error back-propagation in the brain. Trends in cognitive sciences 23 (3), 235–250 (2019). 88. P. Dayan, G. E. Hinton, R. M. Neal, R. S. Zemel, The Helmholtz machine. Neural computation 7 (5), 889–904 (1995). 89. R. P. Rao, D. H. Ballard, Predictive coding in the visual cortex: a functional interpretation of some extra-classical receptive-field effects. Nature neuroscience 2 (1), 79–87 (1999). 34 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

90. B. Milivojevic, A. Vicente-Grabovetsky, C. F. Doeller, Insight reconfigures hippocampal-prefrontal memories. Current Biology 25 (7), 821–830 (2015). 91. J. A. Quent, A. Greve, R. N. Henson, Shape of U: The nonmonotonic relationship between object– location memory and expectedness. Psychological Science 33 (12), 2084–2097 (2022). 92. S. K´ ali, P. Dayan, Off-line replay maintains declarative memories in a model of hippocampal-neocortical interactions. Nature neuroscience 7 (3), 286–294 (2004). 93. D. Newtson, Attribution and the unit of perception of ongoing behavior. Journal of personality and social psychology 28 (1), 28 (1973). 94. D. Newtson, G. Engquist, The perceptual organization of ongoing behavior. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 12 (5), 436–450 (1976). 95. J. M. Zacks, N. K. Speer, K. M. Swallow, T. S. Braver, J. R. Reynolds, Event perception: a mind-brain perspective. Psychological bulletin 133 (2), 273 (2007). 96. N. T. Franklin, K. A. Norman, C. Ranganath, J. M. Zacks, S. J. Gershman, Structured Event Memory: A neuro-symbolic model of event cognition. Psychological Review 127 (3), 327 (2020). 97. M. Kumar, et al. , Bayesian surprise predicts human event segmentation in story listening. Cognitive science 47 (10), e13343 (2023). 98. A. C. Schapiro, T. T. Rogers, N. I. Cordova, N. B. Turk-Browne, M. M. Botvinick, Neural representations of events arise from temporal community structure. Nature neuroscience 16 (4), 486–492 (2013). 99. S. Michelmann, M. Kumar, K. A. Norman, M. Toneva, Large language models can segment narrative events similarly to humans. Behavior Research Methods 57 (1), 1–13 (2025). 100. J. Kounios, M. Beeman, The cognitive neuroscience of insight. Annual review of psychology 65 (1), 71–93 (2014). 101. S. Ohlsson, Information-processing explanations of insight and related phenomena. Advances in the psychology of thinking 1, 1–44 (1992). 102. E. Spens, N. Burgess, T. E. J. Behrens, Modelling the Control of Offline Processing with Reinforcement Learning, in Proceedings of the Thirty-Ninth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025) (2025), https://openreview.net/pdf?id=BFW1fkB8ck .103. Q. Lu, U. Hasson, K. A. Norman, A neural network model of when to retrieve and encode episodic memories. elife 11 , e74445 (2022). 104. R. Hadsell, D. Rao, A. A. Rusu, R. Pascanu, Embracing change: Continual learning in deep neural networks. Trends in cognitive sciences 24 (12), 1028–1040 (2020). 105. G. M. Van de Ven, A. S. Tolias, Generative replay with feedback connections as a general strategy for continual learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.10635 (2018). 106. N. Carlini, et al. , Membership inference attacks from first principles, in 2022 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP) (IEEE) (2022), pp. 1897–1914. 107. E. F. Loftus, J. E. Pickrell, The formation of false memories (1995). 35 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

108. E. Migo, D. Montaldi, K. A. Norman, J. Quamme, A. Mayes, The contribution of familiarity to recog-nition memory is a function of test format when using similar foils. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 62 (6), 1198–1215 (2009). 109. A. P. Yonelinas, L. J. Otten, K. N. Shaw, M. D. Rugg, Separating the brain regions involved in recollection and familiarity in recognition memory. Journal of Neuroscience 25 (11), 3002–3008 (2005). 110. A. Vaswani, et al. , Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems 30 

(2017). 111. H. Sompolinsky, I. Kanter, Temporal association in asymmetric neural networks. Physical review letters 

57 (22), 2861 (1986). 112. H. T. Chaudhry, J. A. Zavatone-Veth, D. Krotov, C. Pehlevan, Long sequence Hopfield memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04532 (2023). 113. D. Krotov, J. Hopfield, Large associative memory problem in neurobiology and machine learning. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.06996 (2020). 114. A. Karuvally, P. Lertsaroj, T. J. Sejnowski, H. T. Siegelmann, Exponential Dynamic Energy Network for High Capacity Sequence Memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.24965 (2025). 115. N. Burgess, G. J. Hitch, Memory for serial order: A network model of the phonological loop and its timing. Psychological review 106 (3), 551 (1999). 116. S. Mangrulkar, et al. , PEFT: State-of-the-art Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning methods, https:// github.com/huggingface/peft (2022). 117. Z. Tan, et al. , Large language models for data annotation and synthesis: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.13446 (2024). 118. T. Wolf, et al. , HuggingFace’s transformers: State-of-the-art natural language processing. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03771 (2019). 119. J. Alammar, The Illustrated Transformer (2018), https://jalammar.github.io/ illustrated-transformer/ , accessed on March 19, 2024. 120. J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, K. Toutanova, Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805 (2018). 121. J. Alammar, The illustrated GPT-2 (2019), https://jalammar.github.io/illustrated-gpt2/ ,accessed on March 19, 2024. 122. H. Jiang, Q. Wu, C.-Y. Lin, Y. Yang, L. Qiu, Llmlingua: Compressing prompts for accelerated inference of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05736 (2023). 123. F. Xu, W. Shi, E. Choi, Recomp: Improving retrieval-augmented lms with compression and selective augmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.04408 (2023). 124. D. Krotov, J. J. Hopfield, Dense associative memory for pattern recognition. Advances in neural information processing systems 29 (2016). 36 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

125. M. Tang, H. Barron, R. Bogacz, Sequential Memory with Temporal Predictive Coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11982 (2023). 126. T. Salvatori, et al. , Associative memories via predictive coding. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34 , 3874–3886 (2021). 37 

.CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint Acknowledgments 

We thank Oliver Vikbladh, Misun Kim, Steve Fleming, Kris Jensen, and Mathias Sabl´ e-Meyer for their insightful comments on the manuscript. 

Funding: Funding support for this work was received from a Wellcome Principal Research Fellowship ‘Neural mechanisms of memory and prediction: Finding structure in experience’ (222457/Z/21/Z) (N.B.) and a Wellcome Collaborative Award ‘Organising knowledge for flexible behaviour in the prefrontal-hippocampal circuitry’ (214314/Z/18/Z) (N.B.). 

Author contributions: Conceptualization: ES, NB. Methodology: ES, NB, Investigation: ES. Visualiza-tion: ES. Supervision: NB. Writing: ES, NB. 

Competing interests: There are no competing interests to declare. 

Data and materials availability: Code for all simulations can be found at https://github.com/ellie-as/hippocampal-neocortical-RAG. All datasets used are publicly available. 

# S1 Supplementary information 

S1.1 Further model details 

S1.1.1 Modelling sequence learning 

The simulations described above use autoregressive sequence models to represent the generative networks trained through hippocampal replay. Specifically transformer-based deep neural networks for text generation are used. The primary goal during training is to adjust the model’s parameters through maximum likelihood estimation, so that the probability it predicts for the true next item in each sequence, based on the items so far, is as high as possible. In other words, the network’s weights are updated to predict the probability distribution of the next item as accurately as possible, a process known as causal language modelling. The training data for the original GPT-2 model is the WebText dataset of online content. Once the model is trained, it predicts the probability distribution across all items given the items so far. To generate a sequence one can sample from this distribution or simply take the most probable item at each step. The equation below gives the probability of a sequence 𝑥 as a product of conditional probabilities of its items: 

𝑝 (𝑥 ) =

> 𝑛

Ö

> 𝑖 =1

𝑝 (𝑠 𝑛 |𝑠 1, ..., 𝑠 𝑛 −1)

We use the Transformers Python library ( 118 ) in all simulations. The first stage of using an LLM is to prepare the inputs with tokenisation. A tokeniser maps commonly occurring chunks of characters to IDs (in order to look up the right token embedding in a learned embedding matrix); in the case of language tokens are often words or parts of words. The concept of tokenisation is applicable to arbitrary sequences, but for simplicity and consistency across the simulations all stimuli are converted to strings of characters (if they are not already text-based). For Mistral 7B the same tokeniser is used as in the pre-trained model, but for the inference models a custom one is used, to ensure that relationships (e.g. EAST or CHILD OF) and entities (e.g. ‘xy’) were each represented by a single token. (Without this, the default tokeniser does this S1 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

inconsistently, e.g. with some pairs such as ‘be’ represented as one token because commonly co-occur, and other such as ‘bx’ as two tokens because they do not.) What exactly does causal language modelling with a custom dataset involve? First the training data is split into blocks, and then for every block the cross-entropy loss is aggregated across all the next token prediction tasks within the block. For example, for GPT-2 the block size (which is also the context size of the trained model) is 1024 tokens. This means that the model is trained to consider up to 1024 tokens of context when predicting the next token in a sequence. So for each block the model tries to predict the second token based on the first token, then the third token based on the first two, and so on, until it predicts the final token based on the preceding 1023. The loss measures the difference between two probability distributions: the distribution predicted by the model and the actual distribution in the data. For each token prediction task, the actual distribution is a ‘one-hot’ vector with a one for the real next token and zeros elsewhere. Specifically, the cross-entropy loss for a single prediction task is calculated as the negative log probability assigned by the model to the actual next token. For a block of tokens, the total loss is the sum of the cross-entropy losses for each token prediction task within the block, and the weights of the model are updated based on this total loss. This procedure is the same whether the model is fine-tuned or trained from scratch. The learning rate decreases over the course of training in all simulations, as per the default behaviour of the Trainer class in the Transformers Python library ( 118 ). 

S1.1.2 Sampling options 

There are many ways to generate sequences from a trained sequence model like Mistral 7B or GPT-2. The simplest is greedy decoding, where the model selects the token with the highest probability as the next token in the sequence. However this can lead to repetitive and predictable sequences. Sampling from the learned probability distribution with a given temperature introduces randomness into the selection of the next item, and provides a way to control the model’s ‘imaginativeness’. Specifically, the temperature parameter determines the ‘sharpness’ of the distribution from which output tokens are selected, so that sequences at a higher temperature are more ‘imaginative’, but more likely to be nonsensical. The equation below describes the ‘softmax with temperature’ function that is applied to the vector of scores for each token to produce a vector of probabilities . A large temperature T flattens the distribution, whereas T close to zero approximates a ‘one-hot’ vector, with a probability of one for the most likely token: 

𝜎 (𝑠 𝑖 ) = 𝑒 𝑠 𝑖 𝑇 

Í𝑛 𝑗 =1 𝑒 𝑠 𝑗 𝑇 

Unless stated otherwise, sequences are sampled from the probability distribution of tokens with a given temperature. Beam search is a search strategy used in some simulations, which considers multiple potential paths through the model’s probability ‘landscape’. At each step, it keeps a fixed number (the beam width) of the most probable sequences generated so far and extends them, eventually choosing the sequence with the highest overall probability. 

S1.1.3 Further details on attention 

In short, the attention mechanism works as follows (explained with reference to GPT-2): a query, a key, and a value vector are produced for each element in the sequence by learned weights. For a given element, the model computes a set of attention scores which determine how much attention should be paid to each element of the input sequence when representing this element. This is achieved by taking the dot products of the given element’s query vector with the key vectors for each element. The final output is the sum of the value vectors S2 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

for each element weighted by the corresponding attention scores (with some normalisation), allowing the model to aggregate information from the most relevant parts of the input. This describes a single ‘attention head’, but GPT-2’s architecture features multiple attention blocks, each with multiple attention heads, which tend to develop different ‘specialisms’ through training. To be more precise the equation is given below: Attention (𝑄, 𝐾, 𝑉 ) = softmax 

 𝑄𝐾 𝑇 

√𝑑 𝑘 



𝑉 

In this equation, 𝑄 , 𝐾 and 𝑉 represent the query, key, and value matrices, respectively. These are derived from the input data. 𝑑 𝑘 represents the dimensionality of the keys (and queries), and is used to scale the dot products in a way that leads to more stable gradients. The softmax function is applied to ensure the weights sum up to 1. When the resulting term is matrix multiplied by V, the result is the relevance-weighted sum of the vector representations in V, for each token in V. In other words, the attention mechanism enriches a token’s representations with a relevance-weighted sum of the other tokens’ representations. See ( 119 ) for a detailed description of this process. Self-attention is a special case of attention in which elements of a sequence ‘attend to’ the sequence they are a part of. Specifically, ‘masked’ self-attention is used, meaning that the representation of a token in an attention block only ‘attends to’ preceding tokens. Previous models like BERT ( 120 ) perform much less well at text generation partly because their attention is not masked in this way. Transformer blocks come in different varieties. GPT-2 ( 23 ) is a decoder-only model consisting of a stack of transformer decoder blocks. Each such block consists of a masked self-attention layer followed by a feedforward layer. In a nutshell, inference with GPT-2 works as follows: First an embedding for each token is obtained from a learned embedding matrix. A key point is that position embeddings representing the tokens’ positions in the sequence are added to the token embeddings (these are required because self-attention is permutation-invariant, so otherwise information about the order of items in the sequence would be lost). Then the sequence of embeddings passes through a series of transformer decoder blocks, each further enriching the token representations so that they come to capture the meaning of the text. See ( 121 ) for helpful illustrations of the stages of processing in GPT-2. GPT-2 ( 23 ) comes in several sizes, with the number of transformer blocks depending on the size of the model. The small variant has 12 transformer blocks, the medium variant has 24 transformer blocks, and the large variant has 36 transformer blocks. 

S1.1.4 Context compression comparison 

Context compression has become an important problem in LLM research because performance often depends on access to relevant information, but context size is limited. Even when long-context models are available, this is computationally costly, and providing too much distracting information to the model can degrade performance. Context compression techniques for LLMs can be divided into extractive and abstractive approaches, where the former selects a subset of the original context, and the latter summarises the context in some way. Extractive methods include LLMLingua ( 122 ), in which an auxiliary model predicts the importance of each token for a given LLM, and only the most important tokens are included in the context. One intuitive form of abstractive context compression simply produces a textual summary of the input, e.g. see RECOMP ( 123 ). But abstractive methods can also map long contexts into compact latent representations. The in-context autoencoder approach ( 63 ) compresses arbitrarily long inputs into a fixed number of memory slots. The encoder’s weights are trained in such a way that the LLM can reconstruct the original context conditioned only on the memory slots. Intriguingly, the authors find that the bigger and better the LLM, the more the context can be compressed at the same reconstruction accuracy. The xRAG ( 33 ) method used here is similar to ICAE, but compresses the context to a single token. The primary reason for using xRAG rather than ICAE is because the stimuli in our simulations are short, and the S3 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

pre-trained ICAE encoders are designed to compress contexts to 128 tokens, which can be longer than the stories themselves. However there is no strong theoretical reason to prefer xRAG to other candidate methods for abstractive context compression. One drawback of xRAG is that compressing texts to a single token then using many tokens to encode details is odd, as the core of the memory takes up a fraction of the capacity of the more extraneous details. 

S1.1.5 Modelling sequence memory in the hippocampus 

Here we provide further context to motivate the model of the hippocampus. In the static model in ( 27 ), a modern continuous Hopfield network (MCHN; ( 31 )) represents the hip-pocampus, interpreted such that the feature units activated by an event are bound together by a memory unit ( 113 ). In the sequential model, this could be adapted to store sequences as follows. Let us consider sequences represented as strings of characters or symbols, which can capture language, spatial trajectories, transitions in a graph, stimuli in sequential learning tasks, and more. (58 ) give a unifying account of how neural network models of associative memory such as MCHNs operate, which helps to explain the extension to sequences. They develop the biologically plausible modern Hopfield network ( 124 ) into ‘a general framework for understanding the operation of . . . memory net-works as a sequence of three operations: similarity, separation, and projection’, which they term ‘universal Hopfield networks’ ( ( 58 ), Abstract). They observe that any of these models can be made asymmetric or heteroassociative rather than autoassociative, if the projections from feature units to memory units capture the current state, but the projections from memory units back to feature units are different (for sequences, these projection weights would correspond to the ‘next state’). Then one state retrieves the next, rather than each state retrieving a pattern-completed version of itself. That is, we want to store patterns 𝑋 and ‘next patterns’ 𝑋 𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡 instead of just patterns, and change the MCHN’s update rule accordingly: 

𝜉 𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡 = 𝑋 𝑛𝑒𝑥𝑡 𝑠𝑜 𝑓 𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥 (𝛽𝑋 𝑇 𝜉 )

The modern continuous asymmetric Hopfield network (MCAHN) converts the MCHN to work for sequences, consistent with the framework above ( 112 ). However there is a problem when you try to apply this naively to certain sequences, as the MCAHN is by default a ‘Markov chain’ model of sequential memory. Whilst it works for sequences in which items are unique, it doesn’t work for, e.g., sentences without modification, as it cannot accurately remember sequences with repeated items; see Figure 5a of ( 125 ). When an item is repeated in a sequence, ( 125 ) show that a MCAHN has trouble recalling the next item, instead producing a composite. (125 ) introduce the temporal predictive coding network (tPC), a more complex network learnt by gradient descent, based on the intuition that higher layers minimize prediction error at lower layers ( 126 ). (A drawback of the tPC is that the model must be ‘presented with the sequence for multiple epochs’ until convergence, so it is no longer capable of one-shot learning, which arguably undermines its plausibility as a model of hippocampal encoding.) They show that the one-layer tPC also has the MCAHN’s issue with repeated items, but suggest the two-layer tPC to resolve this. As ( 125 ) show in Figure 5d of their paper, the hidden layer represents an item’s position in the sequence so the next item can be recalled correctly. Alternatively, one could combine the concept of the modern asymmetric Hopfield network (with return projections from memory to feature units representing the next state) with a state representation that captures the history. This is based on previous work involving the role of temporal context in memory ( 36, 115 ). Consider the example of encoding sentences, i.e. sequences of characters. Suppose each state is a vector of length equal to the number of symbols, consisting of one at the index of the current symbol, plus the previous state multiplied by some decay factor. See Figure 9 for an example. This has the benefit of still being compatible with one-shot learning, although the memory capacity may not scale as well as the more S4 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

complex predictive coding model approach. Initial testing suggests that this model can encode and retrieve sentences (although retrieval performance goes down with sentence length). To show how the preceding ‘context’ is captured, consider the example of encoding sentences, i.e. sequences of characters. Each state can be represented by a vector of length equal to the number of symbols, with one at the index of the current symbol, plus the previous state multiplied by some decay factor. In other words, we want a vector representation xi of the i th state which is a sum of the current symbol’s vector v and activity from the previous state x𝑖 −1 multiplied by a decay rate 𝜆 (noting that the states are then normalised to unit length): 

x𝑖 = v𝑖 + 𝜆 · x𝑖 −1

∥x𝑖 ∥

As with all modern Hopfield network ( 31 ) variants, the inverse temperature, 𝛽 , is a key parameter determining the network’s behaviour. In this case a high value of 𝛽 would be desirable to avoid composite states. The softmax function is given below; in the limit of high 𝛽 , the output of this function becomes a vector with one at the index of the maximum and value and zero elsewhere: 

𝑠𝑜 𝑓 𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥 (𝑧 𝑖 ) = 𝑒 𝛽𝑧 𝑖 

Í𝐾 𝑗 =1 𝑒 𝛽𝑧 𝑗 

Episodic memories consist of complex representations at each time step, with autoassociative connections thought to reconstruct the current time step, and heteroassociative connections to activate the next (see (111 )). As described in Section 4.2.2, the asymmetric MHN described above is combined with a ‘standard’ autoassociative MHN for retrieving an item from a noisy query. Whilst this simple model helps justify the assumption that the hippocampus can store sequences asso-ciatively, it clearly has some limitations. For example, it suggests that when a state from a certain point in an encoded sequence triggers recall, states preceding that point cannot be recalled (only the subsequent states). This could be addressed by adding heteroassociative connectivity backwards in time. A more fundamental problem is that the cue for retrieval can be a noisy version of the whole sequence, but in this simple model retrieval begins by denoising a single item in isolation. This means that retrieval may perform poorly when all items are so noisy that retrieval of any item individually is poor, but the sequence as a whole is sufficient to identify the right memory. Future work could investigate biologically plausible models of hippocampal memory that address this. 

S1.2 Supplementary results 

S1.2.1 Supplementary figures 

Figure S1 shows some additional results relating to the model hippocampus. Figure S2 shows the results of performing principal component analysis on token representations in the spatial inference model, across all layers of the model. 

S1.2.2 Supplementary tables 

Table S1 shows examples of encoded and recalled stories from Section 2.1. Tables S2, S3, and S4 show that the patterns in concreteness, specificity, and richness in detail hold even when controlling for length. This is important because for both the HIPPOCORPUS and simulated data, there are significant Pearson correlations between length and each attribute (Table S2). For the HIPPOCORPUS data, regressing out the length, and then comparing the residual score for each attribute (i.e. the component S5 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure S1 : Modelling the hippocampus with a dual-MHN model for 100 stories from ( 66 ). a) Similarity (dot product) between each xRAG query embedding (constructed from an 80-character excerpt) and the stored xRAG story embedding (whole story), showing a strong diagonal indicating correct memory selection. b) Fraction of episodes perfectly recalled as a function of the decay constant. c) Fraction of episodes perfectly recalled as a function of inverse temperature 𝛽 (applied identically to both MHNs), showing improved recall with sharper retrieval. which cannot be explained by the length) using a t-test, gives the results in Table S3. Doing the same for the simulated data gives the results in Table S4. Table S5 shows the Bartlett story recalled at different temperatures, illustrating the approximate mem-orisation of the narrative in Section 2.2.1. Tables S6 and S7 give the inference accuracy for each template tested in Section 2.3. S6 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure S2 : Principal component analysis of token representations in all layers of the spatial inference model in Section 2.3 (see Figure 7). Activations for each token of random walks in many different environments were extracted from a given layer of the model, to obtain an average vector for each location. Each subplot shows these representations projected into 2D with principal component analysis, colouring each location by its co-ordinates in the environment so that points with the same colour are different nodes which occupy the same position in the 3x3 grid. S7 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Original Gist only Stored detail Gist + detail 

Sarah has a bad habit. All Sarah eats is candy and sweets. She starts to notice a sharp pain in her teeth. The dentist tells her she has 6 cavities! Sarah de-cides she needs to start eating healthier. Sarah has a bad habit of only eat-ing candy and not eating healthy foods. This is a problem because she is not getting the nutrients she needs to stay healthy. Her dentist told her that she has cavities and needs to start eating more fruits and vegetables . . . The dentist tells her she has 6cavities. Sarah has a bad habit of eating only candy. The dentist tells her she has 6 cavities. Sarah’s bad habit of eating only candy has led to her having 6 cavities. The den-tist told her this when she went for a check-up. Sarah needs to change her eating habits ... Stan and his best friend have been friends for 8 years. They met when Stan was in first grade. They play games together, ate together, and watched movies together. Their favorite time of day is when Stan gets home from school. Stan’s best friend is always waiting for him with a wagging tail. Stan and his best friend have been friends for 8 years. They met in kindergarten and have been insep-arable ever since. They do every-thing together, from playing in the park to watching movies at home. They even have a special hand-shake they use to greet each other. Stan’s friend is always there for him, no matter what. . . . Stan’s best friend is always waiting for him with a wagging tail. Stan and his best friend have been friends for 8 years. They met when Stan was walking home from school and his friend was wagging his tail and barking at him. Stan ap-proached the dog and petted him, and they have been friends ever since. They spend a lot of time to-gether, playing, going for walks, and just hanging out. . . . Gina prepared food for the fam-ily. She cooked lasagna, grilled chicken and garlic bread. As soon as we started to eat, her mom became nauseous. After-wards, everyone started to feel queasy. They eventually threw away the food and ordered Chi-nese food. Gina prepared food for the family. She cooked lasagna. However, she got sick and threw up. The family ate the lasagna, but they all got sick and threw up. They went to the hospital and were diagnosed with food poisoning. The food was later found to be contaminated with E. coli .Her mom be-came nauseous. Gina prepared food for the family. She cooked lasagna. However, her mom became nauseous and threw up after eating it. Gina then re-alized that she had used spoiled ground beef for the lasagna. The rest of the family also became sick after eating it. 

Table S1 : Narrative examples of retrieval-augmented generation with compression as a model of hippocampal-neocortical interaction, using Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 plus xRAG weights to simulate neocor-tex. The ‘Original’ column gives the story ‘experienced’ by the system. The ‘Gist only’ column gives the reconstruction from just the xRAG vector, i.e. when the xRAG vector is retrieved from the hippocampus and used to condition the generative network. The ‘Stored detail’ column lists the most surprising detail given the xRAG vector. Specifically, all phrases are extracted from the text, then the perplexity of each phrase given the xRAG vector is calculated. In other words, for each phrase, the model is prompted with the xRAG vector and the phrase in question. Then the phrases are ranked in descending order of perplexity, with the top phrase used as the ‘Stored detail’. The text embedding (from which the xRAG vector is derived) and details for each memory are encoded together in the model hippocampus. The ‘Gist + detail’ column gives the reconstruction of the memory from this representation. S8 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Dataset Concreteness Richness in detail Specificity 

HIPPOCORPUS 𝑟 = 0.019, 𝑝 < 0.001 𝑟 = 0.023, 𝑝 < 0.001 𝑟 = 0.023, 𝑝 < 0.001 Simulated 𝑟 = 0.279, 𝑝 < 0.001 𝑟 = 0.350, 𝑝 < 0.001 𝑟 = 0.240, 𝑝 < 0.001 

Table S2 : Pearson correlations between story length and each LLM-derived attribute. 

Attribute Recalled vs. Retold Recalled vs. Imagined Retold vs. Imagined 

Concreteness 𝑡 = 4.823, 𝑝 < 0.001 𝑡 = 368 .994, 𝑝 < 0.001 𝑡 = 6.445, 𝑝 < 0.001 Richness in detail 𝑡 = 5.467, 𝑝 < 0.001 𝑡 = 445 .861, 𝑝 < 0.001 𝑡 = 7.770, 𝑝 < 0.001 Specificity 𝑡 = 7.772, 𝑝 < 0.001 𝑡 = 426 .456, 𝑝 < 0.001 𝑡 = 5.292, 𝑝 < 0.001 

Table S3 : The results of t-tests on length-residualised attribute scores for HIPPOCORPUS stories. 

Attribute Original vs. Encoded Original vs. Consolidated Encoded vs. Consolidated 

Concreteness 𝑡 = 3.796, 𝑝 < 0.001 𝑡 = 5.850, 𝑝 < 0.001 𝑡 = 2.430, 𝑝 = 0.015 Richness in detail 𝑡 = 4.027, 𝑝 < 0.001 𝑡 = 6.710, 𝑝 < 0.001 𝑡 = 3.468, 𝑝 < 0.001 Specificity 𝑡 = 4.688, 𝑝 < 0.001 𝑡 = 6.581, 𝑝 < 0.001 𝑡 = 2.211, 𝑝 = 0.028 

Table S4 : The results of paired t-tests on length-residualised attribute scores for simulated stories. 

Type Recalled story example 

Original One night two young men from Egulac went down to the river to hunt seals and while they were there it became foggy and calm. Then they heard war-cries, and they thought: “Maybe this is a war-party”. They escaped to the shore, and hid behind a log. Now canoes came up, and they heard the noise of paddles, and saw one canoe coming up to them. There were five men in the canoe, and they said: . . . Temperature of 0 One night two young men from Egulac went down to the river to hunt seals and while they were there it became foggy and calm. Then they heard war-cries, and they thought: “Maybe this is a war-party”. They escaped to the shore, and hid behind a log. Now the war-party started, and they heard the noise of paddles, and saw one canoe coming up to them. There were five men in the canoe, and they said: ... Temperature of 0.5 One night two young men from Egulac went out to the river to hunt seals and while they were there they were robbed by the men from Egulac. The men ran back to Egulac and hid behind a log. When they came out they discovered a canoe coming up to them and they jumped up and began to fight. The canoe came down to the ground and they began to wrestle. The crowd cheered for the young men of Egulac. . . . Temperature of 1 One night two young men from Egulac went up to the river and they saw a canoe coming up to them. Then they heard war-cries, and they heard the sound of paddles, aand they heard war-cries, and they saw one canoe coming up to them. It was full speed, and when it arrived the men said: “This is a war-party. We have come to conquer you in a fight”. When they reached the shore, they saw one canoe . . . 

Table S5 : Recalled stories for different temperatures, for a model trained for five epochs with the ‘Sports’ category of Wikipedia data ( 71 ) as the background data distribution, and prompted with ‘One night two young men from Egulac’. S9 

> .CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license available under a was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint (which this version posted April 8, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.11.04.621950 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Inference template Mean accuracy 

{} EAST {} WEST {} 1.0 

{} WEST {} EAST {} 1.0 

{} NORTH {} SOUTH {} 1.0 

{} SOUTH {} NORTH {} 1.0 

{} EAST {} SOUTH {} WEST {} NORTH {} 1.0 

{} SOUTH {} WEST {} NORTH {} EAST {} 1.0 

{} WEST {} NORTH {} EAST {} SOUTH {} 1.0 

{} NORTH {} EAST {} SOUTH {} WEST {} 1.0 

{} EAST {} EAST {} NORTH {} WEST {} WEST {} SOUTH {} 1.0 

{} NORTH {} NORTH {} WEST {} SOUTH {} SOUTH {} EAST {} 1.0 

{} EAST {} EAST {} SOUTH {} SOUTH {} WEST {} WEST {} NORTH {} NORTH {} 1.0 

{} SOUTH {} SOUTH {} WEST {} WEST {} NORTH {} NORTH {} EAST {} EAST {} 1.0 

Table S6 : Spatial task inference templates and their average accuracies. 

Inference template Mean accuracy 

{} CHILD OF {} PARENT OF {} 1.0 

{} PARENT OF {} CHILD OF {} 1.0 

{} GRANDCHILD OF {} GRANDPARENT OF {} 1.0 

{} GRANDPARENT OF {} GRANDCHILD OF {} 1.0 

{} CHILD OF {} CHILD OF {} PARENT OF {} PARENT OF {} 1.0 

{} PARENT OF {} PARENT OF {} CHILD OF {} CHILD OF {} 1.0 

{} CHILD OF {} SPOUSE OF {} SPOUSE OF {} PARENT OF {} 1.0 

{} PARENT OF {} SPOUSE OF {} SPOUSE OF {} CHILD OF {} 1.0 

{} CHILD OF {} SPOUSE OF {} CHILD OF {} SPOUSE OF {} GRANDPARENT OF 

{} SIBLING OF {} 

0.99 

{} GRANDPARENT OF {} SIBLING OF {} CHILD OF {} SPOUSE OF {} CHILD OF 

{} SPOUSE OF {} 

1.0 

Table S7 : Family tree task inference templates and their average accuracies. S10