Title: The phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor vardenafil reverses sleep deprivation-induced amnesia in mice

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 34

Markdown Content:
1

# THE PHOSPHODIESTERASE -5 INHIBITOR VARDENAFIL 

# REVERSES SLEEP DEPRIVATION -INDUCED AMNESIA IN 

# MICE 

Camilla Paraciani 1, Carlo Castoldi 2, Diana Madalina Popescu 1, Elroy L. Meijer 1, Onno Van Den Hoed 1, Adithya 

Sarma 1, Sophia Wilhelm 1, Nienke de Vries 1, Linda Maria Requie 2, Esmee Y.G. D’Costa 1, Dimitrios Tantis Tapeinos 1,

Pim R.A. Heckman 3, Ewelina Knapska 4, Peter Meerlo 1, Bianca Ambrogina Silva 2,5 , Robbert Havekes 1,5,CA 

> 1

Neurobiology expertise group, Groningen Institute for Evolutionary Life Sciences, University of Groningen, 

Groningen, The Netherlands 

> 2

IPMC, Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, Inserm, 6060 Route des Lucioles, Valbonne France 

> 3

Department of Neuropsychology and Psychopharmacology, Faculty for Psychology and Neuroscience, 

Maastricht University, Maastricht, the Netherlands 

> 4

Laboratory of Neurobiology of Emotions, Nencki -EMBL Partnership for Neural Plasticity and Brain Disorders -

BRAINCITY, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology of Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland 

> 5

Equal contribution 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint 2

# Abstract 

Sleep deprivation (SD) disrupts memory processes, particularly those dependent on the hippocampus. Six hours 

of SD after training in a hippocampus -dependent task typically induces amnesia in mice and impairs performance 

upon memory testing later. However,  we previously demonstrated that object -location memories (OLMs) 

encoded under SD conditions can be recovered several days later, suggesting that these memories were not lost 

but suboptimally stored. Given that engrams of a specific memory are distributed a cross multiple functionally 

connected brain regions, we hypothesized that SD -induced amnesia arises from disrupted network alterations 

extending beyond the hippocampus. Consistent with this, brain -wide cFos mapping revealed a widespread 

reduction in cFos  in memory associated regions during recall in SD mice and connectivity analysis identified the 

hippocampus as a central hub in this network. Since cGMP signaling modulates memory processes, we next 

tested whether the cGMP -specific PDE5 inhibitor vardenafil  could restore access to these latent memories. One 

day after training, vardenafil reversed SD -induced OLM impairment when administered 30 minutes before testing, 

but this effect was lost when testing occurred several days later. To achieve persistent acce ss to OLMs formed 

under SD conditions, we combined vardenafil treatment with optogenetic engram stimulation. This combined 

approach successfully maintained OLM retrievability for several days post -manipulation. Crucially, successful 

retrieval in these mice  was associated with a significant increase in engram cell reactivation within the dorsal 

dentate gyrus compared to mice that failed to recall. Collectively, these findings provide novel insight into the 

molecular and network mechanisms underlying SD -induc ed amnesia and offer a strong rationale for developing 

targeted PDE5 -mediated therapies to reverse SD -related memory deficits. 

Highlights :

• SD -induced amnesia is associated with reduced cFos expression within memory -associative circuitry 

• The phosphodiestarase -5-inhibitor vardenafil can be used to restore memory access 

• Combining optogenetics with vardenafil treatment sustains memory retrieval over several days 

• Successful retrieval reflects increased reactivation of engram cells in the dentate gyrus 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

# Introduction 

Sleep is a fundamental physiological state essential for both mental and physical health, supporting the 

homeostasis of numerous bodily functions. Among its multiple functions, sleep has long been proposed to play a 

critical role in long -term memory consol idation 1–3. Studies have shown that even brief periods of sleep can 

enhance declarative memory 4,5 , while sleep loss impairs memory in both humans and rodents 6–10 .

Network analyses have shown that the hippocampus is central to memory formation and operates within 

a distributed network of cortical and subcortical regions. Successful memory consolidation and later recall 

depend on the coordinated activity of engram en sembles across different brain areas 11 –13 . Brain -wide activity 

mapping 13,14  provides a powerful approach for assessing the distributed neural basis of memory and associated 

dysfunctions 15 –19 . However, to date such a network analysis has not yet been employed to determine how the 

distributed neural circuits underlying memory are perturbed by sleep deprivation (SD). 

Brief periods of SD after learning disrupt hippocampus -dependent memory consolidation, particularly 

the consolidation of hippocampus -dependent memories, through dysregulation of key signaling pathways 2,9,20 –27 .

Specifically, SD compromises cellular processes important for memory consolidation within the hippocampus, 

including reduced cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)/PKA signaling, attenuated mTORC1 -dependent 

protein synthesis, altered dendritic spine densi ty, and impaired long -term potentiation 24,28 –35 . Collectively, these 

alterations in synaptic plasticity processes are thought to be the primary cause of SD -induced amnesia. 

Recent findings from our laboratory indicate that memories formed under SD are not lost but rather 

suboptimally stored, since they can be retrieved through optogenetics engram reactivation or pharmacological 

treatment targeting the cAMP -PKA signalling path way 28 . These findings highlight that SD impairs memory 

accessibility rather than erasing stored information, and that targeting cyclic nucleotide signaling can restore 

recall. Whether similar effects can be observed for the other major cyclic nucleotides remain s to be determined. 

For example, the cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) -protein kinase G (PKG) pathway is essential for early -

phase long -term potentiation (E -LTP) and early consolidation; modulates synaptic efficacy and supports activity -

dependent plast icity 36 –40 . Previous studies suggest that pharmacological elevation of cGMP, achieved through 

inhibition of phosphodiesterase -5 (PDE5), which selectively hydrolyzes cGMP, modulates specific aspects of 

hippocampus -dependent memory formation in rodents 37,41,42 . However, these effects have predominantly been 

attributed to facilitation of acquisition or consolidation under baseline conditions. In contrast, the contribution of 

cGMP signaling to memory retrieval remains unknown. No study to date has directly examin ed whether acute 

PDE5 inhibition at the time of retrieval can enhance memory expression, nor whether such manipulation can 

rescue retrieval deficits induced by SD occurring after learning. Given the established involvement of cGMP in 

hippocampal synaptic p lasticity, acquisition and early memory consolidation, we next investigated whether 

enhancing cGMP signaling could restore object location memory accessibility under SD conditions. Overall, this 

study aims to provide mechanistic insights into how SD disrup ts hippocampus -dependent memory at both 

molecular and network levels, and to identify potential therapeutic targets within distributed memory networks 

that may inform strategies to mitigate the cognitive consequences of insufficient sleep. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4

# Materials and Methods 

An extended description of the different experiments can be found in the supplementary materials. 

Animals 

All experimental procedures followed national Central Animal Procedures (CCD) and Institutional Animal Welfare 

Committee (IvD) guidelines, in line with Directive 2010/63/EU. For whole -brain activity mapping (Fig. 1) and 

pharmacological studies without engr am labeling (Fig. S7), adult male C57Bl/6J mice were obtained from Charles 

River Laboratories at 6 weeks of age, pair -housed upon arrival, and individually housed one week before the 

experiment. Animals were maintained on a 12 -hour light/12 -hour dark cycle  with ad libitum food and water. All 

mice were 2 to 5 months old at testing, which was conducted at the beginning of the light phase. For Figure S7, 

mice were reused once to comply with guidelines for reduction: each animal underwent training and testing t wice, 

but with different objects in different locations, and animals were treated with drugs only once. For the engram -

tagging studies (Fig. 2, 3), adult male c -fos -tTA mice (Jackson Labs strain #:018306) on a C57Bl6/J background 

were bred in our facility,  group -housed until surgery, and individually housed afterwards. Animals were kept on 

standard chow (Altromin), switched to doxycycline (Dox) -supplemented chow (40 mg/kg) one week before 

surgery, and remained on Dox until the day before training. Twenty -fo ur hours before training, the diet was 

switched back to standard chow without Dox to allow engram tagging the day after. Immediately after training, 

mice were returned to high -dose Dox chow (1000 mg/kg; to accelerate the closure of the tagging window) and 

remained on this diet for the rest of the experiment ( i.e. , 28 ). For Figures 1, 2, and 3 experiments, animals were 

euthanized by transcardial perfusion 90 minutes after behavioral testing; for Figure S7, animals were sacrificed 

by cervical dislocation. 

Object -location memory task 

To reduce stress and acclimate animals to experimental procedures, mice were handled for two days (4 min/day, 

by two experimenters). On the second day, mice were weighed and given a mock intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection 

(one needle insertion with an empty  syringe) if the subsequent experiment required an injection (Fig. 3, S7, 4). The 

next day, they were habituated for 5 min to the empty OLM arena. The OLM task took place in a PVC arena (40 × 

30 × 30 cm) with two large spatial cues on opposing short walls ( checkerboard or striped patterns) 8,28,43 . During 

habituation, no objects were present. In the training session, two identical objects were placed symmetrically 

~7.5 cm from one of the long and one of the short side walls, and mice explored for 10 min after being introduced 

from the same starting  position. After training, mice returned to their home cage and either left undisturbed (non –

sleep deprived, NSD) or kept awake for 6 h in the home cage (sleep deprived, SD). In the recall session on the 

following day, one object was displaced ~15 cm along  a straight line, and mice were allowed to explore the arena 

and objects freely for 10 min. Different sets of objects were used for different animals, but the different sets were 

similarly distributed across treatment groups. The original location of the o bjects as well as the choice for the 

displaced object (left or right/up or down) was randomized across animals and treatment groups. The arena and 

objects were cleaned with 70% ethanol between trials. Habituation, training and test sessions took place at t he 

beginning in the first two hours of the light phase. Memory performance during the test session was quantified 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

using the d2 discrimination index: (time exploring relocated object  – time exploring non -relocated object) / total 

objects exploration time. Exploration was scored using BORIS software 44 , with exploration defined as nose 

contact or orientation within 1 cm to the object. Mice that climbed onto objects with all four paws or escaped the 

arena were excluded from analysis. 

Sleep deprivation 

Animals were subjected to a single 6 -hour SD session between the first few hours of the light phase, starting 

immediately after the training trial in the OLM task. After this, mice were left undisturbed in the home cage for 18 

hours until the testing sessi on. SD was achieved by using the gentle stimulation method, which involves gently 

tapping on the cage or shaking the cage, and is considered only mildly stressful, as it does not increase 

glucocorticoid levels beyond baseline levels observed across the cir cadian cycle 32,45 –49 . This SD method has been 

validated through EEG recordings, which show a complete loss of REM sleep and approximately 95% of NREM 

sleep 50 .

Brain extraction and fixation 

Ninety minutes following the behavioral testing (Fig. 1,  3, 4), mice were transcardially perfused with 0.9% NaCl 

containing heparin, followed by 4% paraformaldehyde in 0.01M phosphate -buffered saline (PBS). Brains were 

post -fixed in PFA for 48 hours at 4°C. Subsequently, brains were washed with 0.01M PB for 24 hours  and then 

transferred to a 30% sucrose solution for cryoprotection for 48 hours, with the solution renewed daily. Finally, 

brains were frozen using liquid nitrogen and stored at  -80°C. 

Whole -brain immunofluorescence staining 

For whole -brain cFos immunostainings (Fig. 1), 40 micron coronal brain sections were cut with a sliding cryostat. 

Sections were stored in 48 -well plates free -floating in 1X PBS with 1% sodium azide at +4°C. Immunofluorescence 

staining was performed on free -floating sections (1 in 5 whole -brain series). First, sections were washed 2 times 

in 1X PBS at room temperature (RT, 5 minutes each) and subsequently incubated in blocking solution at RT (1X 

PBS, Triton 0.3% and bovine serum albumin, 1%) for 90 minutes u nder constant shaking. Next, the sections were 

incubated with primary antibody (rabbit anti -cFos, 1:5000, Synaptic Systems, #226 008) in 1X PBS with 1% BSA 

and Triton 0.1% for 48 h at 4°C under constant shaking. After incubation, sections were left at RT  for 15 minutes, 

thoroughly washed in PBST (Triton 0.1%) and subsequently incubated with Alexa -conjugated secondary antibody: 

Donkey anti -rabbit 647 (1:1000, Invitrogen, A31573) diluted in PBST (Triton 0.1%) at RT for 2 hours under constant 

shaking. Section s were then washed 3 times (5 minutes each) with 1X PBS and then mounted on superfrost glass 

slides (ThermoScientific) with DAPI Vectashield (Vector Labs, H -1200 -10). Images were acquired with a Zeiss 

Axioscan microscope Z1 equipped with a Hamamatsu Orca F lash 4 camera (2048x2048 pixels, 6.5 μm pixel size) 

with a 20x/0.8 Plan Apochromat objective. The resulting image's pixel size is 0.325 μm. 

Whole -brain image analysis 

Whole -brain datasets were aligned to the 10μm  Allen Brain Atlas CCFv3 51 , in which we added a division between 

the dorsal and ventral hippocampus. Atlas registration was performed using Aligning Big Brains and Atlases 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

(ABBA) 14,52 –55 . Slice positioning on the anterior -posterior axis and angle correction were obtained by DeepSlice 53 

and subsequently checked and manually adjusted when needed. For all sections, atlas  registrations were  first 

performed automatically by affine and spline registrations 54,55 , and subsequently manually refined using 

BigWarp 52  to maximize precision. At least two independent experimenters checked atlas registration accuracy. 

All atlas annotations were imported into QuPath (v0.5.1; 56 ). Quantification of cFos+ cells was performed on 16 -bit 

grey scale images, using BraiAn extension for QuPath 14 . Positive cell detection, segmentation, and classification 

were performed following the procedures described in Chiaruttini et al. 2025 14 . Damaged or misaligned tissue 

portions were excluded from  further  analysis. 

Whole -brain data analysis 

Statistical analyses and whole -brain visualization were performed in Python using BraiAn 14 . First, we set atlas 

parcellation granularity at “summary structures” as defined by Wang et al. 2020 51  (whole brain atlas parcellated 

in 316 regions ) and performed a quality control  screening  across the whole dataset by comput ing  the coefficient 

of variation of cFos+  cell density for each summary structure across different sections of the same animal. When 

the variation of cFos positive cell density changed drastically between sections from the same animal, images 

were manually checked for potential artifacts. Subseque ntly, we calculated the number of positive cells for each 

summary structure by summing cFos+ cells across all sections. The same was done with the associated 

structures' area in mm². All subsequent analysis was based  on per region density measure (cFos+/mm2).  All 

regions missing for at least one subject, as well as the cerebellum, fiber tracts and the ventricular system were 

excluded from the analysis. For assessing global differences between groups  we used Mean -centered Task Partial 

Least Squares (PLS) analysis 57  as implemented in BraiAn 14 , in which statistically significant differences are 

assessed through permutation test, while the reliability of the contribution of each nonzero region salience is 

determined using  bootstrap estimates of the salience standard errors 58 . Brain division into four  functional  circuits 

was obtained on the basis of existing literature: memory -associative 59 –66 ; emotional -motivational -arousal 67,68 ;

stimulus processing 69 –72 ; sensory motor 73 –80 . Brain areas assigned to each functional circuit are listed in 

Supplementary Table  S1.  Global differences between SD and NSD mice for all the summary structures as well as 

for each functional network were independently assessed by PLS , through 10K permutations. The reliability of the 

scores of each region in the memory -associative network was performed by bootstrap, through 10K resamples. 

The resulting estimates of the regions’ salience scores were interpreted as Z -scores, with Z ≈ ±1.9 6 taken as 

statistically stable (p < 0.05, two -tailed). 

For network connectivity analysis , we first used the salience defined by PLS calculated  over the  summary 

structures,  stabilized  through 10K bootstrap resamples, and identified the 30 most prominent regional 

contributors to the whole -brain contrast  between SD and NSD mice.  These Top 30 Summary Structures (T30SS) 

were identified by ranking all summary structures (n=214; removing those with missing cFos quantifications) 

according to the highest absolute magnitude of their bootstrap -derived Z -scores. For connectome data analysi s, 

we utilized a high -resolution data -driven model of the mouse connectome, derived from 428 anterograde tracing 

experiments in young adult wild -type mice 81 . To  build an unweighted network, we used the “normalized 

connectivity density” c i,j  defined by the model for any couple of brain structures <i,j>. Note that c i,j ≠c i,j . This index 

defines the level of anatomical connectivity, and for its  binarization  we only kept the connections <i,j> such that 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7

log(c i,j ) >  -4.5. Connected volume was computed by measuring the summary structures’ outdegree to the T30SS, 

in relation with the corresponding volume of the structure within its major division. The volume of each structure 

and major division was defined by the nu mber of voxels of the corresponding annotation within the 3D atlas. Input 

connectivity to a set  B of regions for another set  A of regions was defined as the sum of each structure’s outdegree 

to the  B: ∑𝐴  

> 𝑠

∑𝐵  

> 𝑡

[𝑡  ∈ 𝑁 𝑜𝑢𝑡  (𝑠 )]. To test the specificity of an hyperconnection of a set  A of regions to T30SS, we 

calculated the input connectivity for  A to 100,000 random sets of 30 summary structures (30SSi) and compared 

them to the input connectivity to the T30SS. A bootstrap p -value was calculated as the fraction of these 100,000 

random sets that exhibited a higher input connectivity. Importantly, for  each 30SSi we maintained the same 

anatomical distribution of the T30SS (Fig. 2A; 16 IsoCTX, 1 OLF, 3 HPF, 1 CTXsp, 2 PAL, 3 TH, 1 HY, 2 MB, 1 P). 

Cross correlations were performed with the Pearson method on the cFos density in every structure of each grou p, 

following a normalization on the cFos density of the whole brain. Regions for which the quantification was present 

in less than 4 animals were discarded from the cross correlation. For each correlation of two structures, we also 

performed a test of the  null hypothesis that the distributions underlying the samples are uncorrelated and 

normally distributed. 

Virus construct and packaging 

To label memory engram cells (Fig.  3 and Fig.  4), we bilaterally injected an adeno -associated virus (AAV9 -TRE -

ChR2 -mCherry, titer: 3.75e14, 200 nL; Penn Vector Core, Philadelphia, US) in the dentate gyrus (DG) of c -fos -tTA 

mice using the following coordinates:  -2.0 mm anterior -posterior (AP), 1.3 mm ±  medial -lateral (ML),  -1.8 mm 

dorsal -ventral (DV). Channelrhodopsin -2 (ChR2) and mCherry expression were controlled by the tetracycline 

response element (TRE), as previously described 28 . In this way, cFos -driven expression of tTA induces ChR2 and 

mCherry expression, which can be suppressed by keeping animals on a Dox -containing chow ( i.e. , cFos 

expression triggers ChR2 and mCherry expression only in the absence of Dox). 

Viral injection and optic fiber implants surgery 

All surgeries were performed in a stereotaxic frame (Kopf Instruments) following established procedures 28 . Mice 

were anesthetized with isoflurane (5% induction; 1.8 –2.0% maintenance) and placed on a heating pad to maintain 

body temperature. Carprofen (0.1 mL/10 g at 0.5mg/ml concentration) and lidocaine (0.1 mL at 20mg/ml 

concentration) were administered imme diately after induction. Small bilateral holes were drilled in the skull using 

a 0.5 mm diameter microdrill at the appropriate locations, and viral solutions were injected using a 10 μL Hamilton 

syringe with a 33G nanofil needle (WPI). The needle was lower ed to the pocket site at  –1.9 mm (1 min), raised 

slightly to  –1.8 mm (1 min), and the virus was delivered at 70 nL/min. After injection, the needle was held for 1 min 

at  –1.8 mm and  –1.7 mm before withdrawal. For experiments involving only viral labeling o f engram cells (Fig. 3), 

the skin was closed with sutures. For optogenetic experiments (Fig. 4), optical fibers were implanted at  –2.0 mm 

AP, ±0.13 mm ML (fiber length 0.175 mm) and secured with screws and C&B Metabond. At the end of surgery, 

mice received  0.1 mL saline and were allowed to recover for 3 weeks before starting the behavioral experiments. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

Optogenetic stimulation protocol 

For the experiment involving optogenetic stimulation (Fig.  4), DG engram cells were optogenetically stimulated 

with 15 ms pulses at 20 Hz for 3 minutes. Stimulation was induced using a 473nm laser (CrystaLaser) driven by a 

TTL input (Doric lenses). The power delivered at the DG was 10 -15 mW. All optogenetic laser s timulation took 

place in the home cage of the test mouse, which was connected to the laser cables for 5 minutes. 

Drug preparation 

Drug preparation was performed as previously described 42 . Vardenafil hydrochloride powder was dissolved in the 

vehicle solution (methyl cellulose tylose solution (0.5%) and 2% Tween80) no longer than 24 hours before the 

injection. All components were obtained from Sigma Aldrich, Zwijndrecht, the Netherlands. Th e injection volume 

was calculated in proportion to the body weight, 2 ml/kg. Vardenafil was administered i.p. at a dose of 0.3 mg/kg. 

Dose and injection volume were based on the previous work with vardenafil in memory studies 42 . Injections were 

given 30 minutes before the OLM test in the studies without optogenetic stimulation (Fig. 3 and Fig. S7). In the 

study combining optogenetic stimulation and pharmacological treatment, the injection was given immediately 

after the optogene tic stimulation (Fig. 4). At this time point PDE5 inhibition was shown to be most effective for 

memory enhancement in mice 37,40 .

Engram cells immunofluorescence staining 

For pharmacological and optogenetic experiments (Fig. 3, 4), coronal brain sections were cut at a thickness of 20 

microns with a sliding cryostat. Immunofluorescence staining was performed to visualize cFos and mCherry 

expression in hippocampal tissue sect ions. Cups containing 3 to 4 dorsal brain sections were washed three times 

with 0.01 M PBS for 5 min each time and incubated for 20 min in 0.3% H202 in PBS on a shaker at RT. Then, sections 

were washed 3 times x 10 min with PBS and incubated with 5% normal  donkey serum (NDS) in PBST (0.2% 

TritonX100) for one hour (to block nonspecific binding). Next, the sections were incubated with primary 

antibodies —mouse anti -cFos (1:1000, Abcam, #ab208942) and rabbit anti -mCherry (1:1000, Invitrogen, #PA5 -

34974) —in PBS  with 1% NDS and 0.2% Triton -X100 for 3 nights at 4°C. After primary antibody incubation, all the 

sections were washed 2 times for 5 min and 2 times for 10 min with PBS at RT and then incubated for four hours 

(at RT and protected from light) with secondary  antibodies —donkey anti -mouse AF488 (1:400, Jackson Labs, #A -

21202) and donkey anti -rabbit AF555 (1:500, Jackson Labs, #A -31572) — diluted in 1% NDS. Sections were then 

washed 4 times for 5 minutes each with PBS, mounted on glass slides, and covered with DA PI Vectashield (Vector 

Labs, H -1200 -10). Fluorescent signals were visualized using a Zeiss AXIO Observer microscope with 20x 

magnification. Images were captured using DAPI, mCherry, and cFos filters with exposures set to avoid 

overexposure while maintainin g clear visibility of labeled cells. Images were analyzed using Zeiss software to 

stitch and process images. 

Engram cell counting 

The number of mCherry - and cFos -positive cells was assessed in 3 coronal sections per animal to quantify their 

expression and colocalization in the dentate gyrus (DG; Fig. 3, 4). Fluorescent images were obtained using a Zeiss 

AXIO Observer microscope and a nalyzed in QuPath (v.0.4.3). A pre -developed script (StarDist) has been optimized 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

to automate cell counting 82 . The cell body layer within the dorsal DG region was defined as the region of interest 

(ROI). The StarDist script was then adapted to use DAPI staining to identify the total number of nuclei. In addition, 

a classifier was trained in QuPath to identify and  discriminate cFos and mCherry positive cells and applied to all 

sections. Colocalization was defined as cells positive for both cFos and mCherry. The following formulas were 

used: ((cFos+ cells + cFos+mCherry+ cells) / DAPI cells)*100; ((mCherry+ cells +  cFos+mCherry+ cells) / DAPI 

cells)*100; and (cFos+mCherry+ cells / mCherry+ cells)*100. Manual verification of cell counts was performed in 

a blinded manner. Damaged brains or slices, or those with mCherry expression restricted to one hemisphere, 

were excl uded. All analyses were run using the same parameter -configuration file to ensure full reproducibility 

across animals and groups. 

Statistical Analysis 

Data were analyzed by unpaired t -tests, one -way and two -way ANOVAs, and post -hoc tests as appropriate and 

indicated for each experiment. All data are represented as mean ± SEM using JASP software (Version 0.19.3.0; 

https://jasp -stats.org/) and Prism 10 (Gr aphPad Software, La Jolla, CA). Graphical illustrations were generated 

using BioRender (BioRender, 2025; https://biorender.com/). The statistical significance was set at p < 0.05. 

Detailed statistical tests and data with exact p values are listed in  supple mentary  Table S 2.

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

# Results 

Sleep deprivation -induced impairment of OLM recall is associated with decreased activation of memory -

related brain -wide networks. 

We hypothesized that SD following memory encoding causes impaired memory retrievability, associated with a 

dysregulation of large -scale network activity, extending beyond localized hippocampal deficits. To test this 

hypothesis, C57BL/6J male mice were subj ected to a single SD period of 6 hours immediately after the training 

trial in the OLM task, using the gentle handling method, considered only mildly stressful 32,45 –49 . After this period, 

mice were left undisturbed in the home cage for 18 h until the test session for memory recall (24 hours after 

training; Fig. 1A). Consistent with previous findings 8,28,43 , during recall, NSD controls exhibited a significant 

preference for the relocated object, indicative of an intact spatial memory, whereas SD mice failed to discriminate 

between objects, reflecting impaired memory retrieval (Fig. 1B, left: unpaired t -test:  SD vs. NSD t22 = 2.291, p = 

0.0319; right: two -way RM ANOVA, F1,22 = 5.283, p = 0.0314). During training, all groups displayed comparable 

exploration of both objects, indicating no innate preference (Fig. S1; N.S.). 

To investigate how such impaired memory retrieval is reflected in network activity at the systems level, 

we performed brain -wide activity mapping from brains collected 90 minutes following OLM recall in SD and NSD 

animals by measuring the expression of the  immediate early gene cFos (Fig.  1C, D; Chiaruttini et al. 14 ). 

Interestingly, the global density of cFos -positive cells did not differ between group s, indicating an absence of 

global activity changes (Fig. 1E, S2, S3, S4). To test whether SD -related effects may emerge within specific brain 

networks rather than at the whole -brain scale, we defined four macro -circuits associated with distinct functional 

processes based on the existing literature 59,64,67,71,75,77 , namely: stimulus processing, motivational -emotional -

arousal, sensory -motor, and memory -associative circuits (a detailed description of the regions composing each 

circuit is available in Supplementary Table 1). PLS analysis comparing cFos density in the t wo groups revealed 

that, among the four networks, only the memory -associative network showed significant differential activity in SD 

vs NSD mice (Fig. 1F; mean -centered task PLS, p = 0.0174, 10 000 permutations). Within this network, a number 

of cortical,  hippocampal, and subcortical regions showed decreased cFos in SD compared to NSD mice (Fig. 1G). 

For instance, SD mice had reduced cFos density in the hippocampal CA1 as well as the retrosplenial, anterior 

cingulate, and entorhinal cortices: regions critic ally implicated in object and spatial representations 83 –87 .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 

Figure 1. Impaired retrievability to OLMs formed during sleep deprivation is associated with reduced cFos activity in 

memory circuits. (A)  Schematic representation of the experimental procedure, n=12  (B)  Left: d2 index. NSD mice scored 

above chance, indicating intact memory retrieval, whereas SD mice failed to detect spatial novelty (one -sample t -test: NSD p 

= 0.0021, SD [N.S.] p = 0.2191), reflecting memory inaccessibility. Right: Exploration times durin g recall. NSD mice showed a 

significant preference fo r the relocated object, whereas SD mice failed to discriminate between objects, reflecting OLM 

retrievability deficit. Raw values are presented for ease of interpretation; however, statistical analysis for the right pane l was 

performed on log₁₀ -transformed  data to satisfy normality assumptions.  (C)  Representative images of cFos 

immunohistochemistry. Top: whole -section representation, scale bar, 1000 μm. Bottom: representative sample regions: 

RSPd, PL, CA1d and ENTl; scale bar, 100 μm (RSPd, CA1d) and 40μm ( PL, ENTl).  (D)  Representative examples of atlas 

registration and positive cell segmentation. cFos detections are shown for the two conditions: NSD group, yellow; SD group, 

blue. The black reticulate represents the boundaries of Allen CCFv3’s brain regions, after being ma pped onto each brain 

section with ABBA.  (E)  Brain -wide comparison of cFos density between SD and NSD mice following memory recall. Left: total 

cFos density (n=9, unpaired t test, P=0.3496). Right: global region by region comparison (n=9 mice , for n=214 regions, mean -

centered PLS, p = 0.1433, 10000 permutations).  (F)  cFos density comparison between SD and NSD mice following memory 

recall in four macrocircuits (mean -centered PLS,10000 permutations): stimulus processing (n=40 regions), sensorimotor 

function (n=25 regions), emotional –motivational regulation (n=61 regions ), and memory –associative (n=46 regions) processes. 

(G)  cFos density post -hoc pairwise comparisons between SD and NSD within the memory -associative macrocircuit (n=9 mice 

for n=46  regions; Supplementary Table 1). Regions in grey are not part of the memory -associative circuit; regions in white are 

part of the memory -associative circuit but do not significantly differ between the two groups (|z -score| < 1.96). No brain region 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12  

> showed higher cFos expression in SD mice relative to NSD mice. Detailed description of statistics can be found in the
> Statistical Analysis Table S2. Created using BraiAn, BrainGlobe, and BioRender.com.

Because our  whole -brain mapping analyses of impaired spatial memory recall revealed a network -specific activity 

impairment localized to memory -relevant circuits , we next investigated the functional connectivity organization 

of this network. For this, we combined our whole -brain cFos mapping results (Fig.1) with structural connectivity 

data from the Allen Institute mouse connectome atlas 81  to identify putative hub regions that may serve as central 

upstream orchestrators of the distributed memory network impaired by SD. 

The SD impaired network was defined as the pool of thirty regions (Top 30 Summary Structures, T30SS) 

showing the largest differences between SD and NSD mice across the whole brain (Fig. 2A; obtained by whole -

brain PLS analysis; for analytical details see M aterials and Methods) and included mostly cortical and subcortical 

regions within the memory -associative macrocircuit (Fig. 1F -G, 2A). To determine whether we could identify 

candidate input hubs extensively and selectively targeting the T30SS (hereafter re ferred to as “hyperinputs”), we 

assessed the brain -wide monosynaptic inputs to all the 30 brain structures composing the T30SS and looked for 

regions targeting the highest number of the T30SS and the lowest number of non -T30SS regions. We ranked all 

T30SS  inputs by the number of targeted T30SS (Fig. S5 ), grouped  them by major brain division and assessed which 

major division contained the highest proportion of inputs hubs (defined as regions targeting at least 26 out of the 

thirty T30SS. Fig. 2B). This analy sis identified the hippocampal formation (HPF) as the major division most 

prominently targeting the T30SS. Specifically, four HPF subregions, representing 30% of the total HPF volume, 

projected to at least 26 of the 30 T30SS regions (86.5%; Fig. 2B). The H PF was followed by the isocortex (IsoCTX), 

which showed 0.6% of its volume connected to 27 T30SS regions and by the thalamus (TH), with 3.7% of its volume 

connected to 20 T30SS regions. All other major divisions projected to less than 50% of the T30SS. The refore, the 

HPF emerged as the major division with the largest proportion of its volume targeting the majority of T30SS regions, 

suggesting a potentially central role in coordinating activity across these structures. 

To verify the unique structural connection between the four HPF subregions and the T30SS, we quantified 

the connectivity distribution to the T30SS across all combinations of four summary structures (quartets; Fig. 2C, 

stratified by major divisions). This  analysis identified four hippocampal regions (the presubiculum (ProS), 

subiculum (SUB), lateral entorhinal cortex (ENTl), and medial entorhinal cortex, (ENTm)) that collectively 

projected to nearly all T30SS regions, except for PCN, CUN, and NOT located in  the midbrain and pons (Fig. 2D, 

left). We hereafter refer to these four hippocampal regions as the “hyperinput quartet”. Notably, this hyperinput 

quartet exhibited the highest connectivity to the T30SS compared with all other possible four -region combinat ions 

within each major division (Fig. 2C). 

We subsequently raised the  question  whether  the identified hyperinput quartet is specifically 

hyperconnecte d to the T30SS and not unspecifically hyperconnected to the whole brain.  To test this hypothesis, 

we calculated the input connectivity of the hyperinput quartet to 100,000 random sets of 30 summary structures 

(30SS i) and compared this to the connectivity to the T30SS. Th e analysis confirmed that the input connectivity of 

the hyperinput quartet was specific to the T30SS (p=0.00006, Fig. 2D right). When each region of the hyperinput 

quartet was examined individually, all remained selectively connected to the T30SS (SUB: p=0. 00004; ProS: 

p=0.00017; ENTl: p=0.01359; ENTm: p=0.02326). Remarkably, this hyperconnectivity to the T30SS did not emerge 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

in other randomly generated input quartets from other major divisions (random cortical quartet, p=0.30964; 

random thalamic quartet, p=0.82876; Fig. 2D, right), thus highlighting the unique identity of the hyperinput quartet 

as input hub to the T30SS. Colle ctively, these findings identify an input hub of four regions that may globally 

influence the specific network associated with impaired retrievability of OLMs formed under sleep deprivation. 

After having identified  the  input hub by its unique anatomical connectivity to the T30SSt, we investigated whether 

its functional connectivity to the T30SS was affected by SD by computing pairwise inter -regional covariance of 

cFos density between the four hyperinput regions and the  T30SS in the two groups. Notably, in NSD mice, cFos 

activity in the hyperinput quartet showed significant covariation with most T30SS, while such a correlation pattern 

was lost in SD mice (Fig. 2E). These results suggest that SD during consolidation may we aken the synchronized 

activity between the hyperinput quartet and its downstream targets at the time of memory recall. Collectively, 

whole -brain cFos mapping revealed that the memory retrievability impairment induced by SD during the initial 

phases of memo ry consolidation, is associated with reduced cFos expression within memory -associative 

circuitry and identify the HPF as a possible orchestrator of such network changes. Indeed, anatomical 

connectivity analysis identified four hippocampal regions (hyperinp ut quartet) as an input hub to the SD -impaired 

memory network (T30SS). Interestingly, this identified input hub comprises four regions that together form the 

principal output system of the hippocampal formation 88 –92  with 84.7 % of its volume sending projections to all four 

regions of the hyperinput quartet (Fig. 2F; 14 out of 19 HPF regions ; supplementary Table S3 ) and representing 

42% of its brain -wide input connectome. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 

Figure 2. The hippocampal formation is an input hub targeting the brain network impaired by SD .  (A)  List of 

the thirty brain regions (T30SS) showing the most prominent cFos differences in SD vs NSD mice.  Colors reflect anatomical 

organization by major division  (B)  Identification of hyperinputs to the T30SS. Percentage of T30SS receiving projections from 

each summary structure, stratified by the corresponding major division volume. Only divisions for which at least one 

summary structure is connected to >50% of T30SS  are shown; all other major divisions exhibit <50% and are not shown. The 

HPF shows the largest volume highly connected to T30SS, followed by IsoCTX and TH.  (C)  Distribution of input connectivity 

to T30SS for each quartet (combination of 4 summary structures stratified by major division). Quartet input connectivity (y 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 

axis) is calculated as the sum of the number of T30SS targeted by each component of the quartet. The “hyperinput quartet” 

(ProS, SUB, ENTl, and ENTm) show the highest connectivity to the T30SS accounting for 104 of 120 total possible projections 

to T30SS.  Colors indicate major divisions as depicted in A.  (D)  Left: Diagram of the hyperinput connectivity to the T30SS 

(Top), and of two additional quartets randomly drawn within Isocortex and TH (bottom). Right: comparison of the hyperinput 

quartet→T30SS connectivity versus its connectivity to random 30 -region set s (top, p≤0.00006). Randomly selected quartets 

from cortical or thalamic regions do not show such specificity (IsoCTX p=0.30964; TH p=0.82876).  (E)  Functional 

connectivity analysis between the hyperinput quartet (rows) and the T30SS (columns) in NSD and SD mice following memory 

recall. Pearson correlation matrices showing inter -regional correlations of cFos density. Colors reflect Pearson correlation 

coefficients and starts indicate correlation p values. *p <  0.05; **p  < 0.01; ***p  < 0.001; ****p  < 0.0001.  (F)  Input 

connectivity to the hyperinput quartet. Left: bar plot showing the percentage volume of each major brain division connected 

to all four hyperinput quartet regions. Middle: focus on the hippocampal formation, highlighting the subregions connected 

to  all four regions of the hyperinput quartet. Right: major division of origin of the shared projections to the hyperinput quart et. 

Notably, 42% of structural inputs come from the HPF. Detailed description of statistical analysis can be found in the 

Supplemen tary Table 2. Created using BraiAn, BrainGlobe, and BioRender.com. 

Sleep deprivation -induced memory recall deficits are associated with reduced DG engram reactivation and 

vardenafil administration upon memory recall rescues the associated memory deficits and enhances DG 

engram cells reactivation. 

In the previous section, we showed that the majority of the input regions projecting to the hyperinput 

quartet were confined to hippocampal formation (Fig. 2F). Several of these regions, despite unaltered cFos 

expression between groups (Fig. 1G, S2) are we ll established as critical inputs for memory recall. Although 

additional regions may warrant investigation, the dentate gyrus (DG) is of particular interest because it provides 

input to all four hyperinput regions. Moreover, prior literature identifies the  DG as the principal gateway to the 

trisynaptic hippocampal circuit and a key regulator of hippocampus -dependent memory retrieval 93 . Consistent 

with this role, studies in other models of amnesia have shown that retrieval deficits have been associated with 

impaired reactivation of DG engram cells 94 –97 . We therefore examined whether SD specifically disrupts DG engram 

reactivation, potentially accounting for the observed retrieval impairment. To address this question, cFos tTA 

mice underwent OLM training, allowing us to tag DG engram cells activated duri ng learning, followed by 6 hours 

of SD. The day after, mice underwent recall and brains were collected 90 minutes after (Fig. 3A, n=19). We then 

quantified neurons expressing mCherry (cells active during training), and cFos (cells active during recall). 

Co localization of mCherry+ and cFos+ cells indicated re -engagement of the original memory engram cells during 

recall, with higher percentages reflecting successful memory retrieval 95 –98 . SD mice that failed to properly recall 

the OLM (Fig. 3B), showed no differences in the percentage of cFos+ and mCherry+ cells between groups (Fig 3C -

E), confirming prior results that overall cFos levels did not differ in the DG between groups. Interestin gly, we found 

decreased colocalization of mCherry+ and cFos+ cells in the DG of SD mice (Fig. 3F), indicating that the negative 

effects of SD on memory recall are reflected in a selective failure to reactivate memory engram cells. 

Based on these findings, we next sought to determine whether enhancing cGMP –PKG signaling via the 

FDA -approved PDE5 inhibitor vardenafil could rescue OLM performance, and if so, whether this would happen by 

promoting reactivation of these memory engram pop ulations. To address this, cFos tTA mice underwent OLM 

training followed by 6 hours of SD. Thirty minutes before the retention test on the following day, animals received 

an i.p. injection of vardenafil, and brains were collected 90 minutes after recall (F ig. 3A). During training, all groups 

displayed comparable exploration of both objects, indicating no innate preference (Fig. S6B; N.S.). During testing, 

d2 index measurements showed that vardenafil could restore memory performance in SD mice (Fig. 3B left:  two -

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 

way ANOVA, interaction: F 1,72  = 6.917, p = 0.0104; post -hoc Bonferroni: NSD -vehicle vs. SD -vehicle p = 0.0002, 

NSD -vardenafil vs. SD -vehicle p < 0.0001, SD -vardenafil vs. SD -vehicle p < 0.0001). Consistently, the exploration 

times of the two objects during testing confirmed that NSD co ntrols and SD -vardenafil mice showed a clear 

preference for the relocated object, consistent with intact spatial memory, whereas SD mice failed to 

discriminate between objects, indicating impaired memory retrieval (Fig. 3B rig ht: two -way RM ANOVA, 

interaction: F 3,72  = 11.34, p < 0.0001; post -hoc Bonferroni: NSD -vehicle p < 0.0001, NSD -vardenafil p < 0.0001, SD -

vardenafil p < 0.0001, SD -vehicle N.S.). PDE5 inhibition did not improve cognitive performance in non -SD 

conditions, likely because baseline cyclic nucleotide  levels are sufficient for normal hippocampal function. 

Similar results were observed in C57Bl/6J mice (Fig. S7), highlighting the reproducibility of the data and the 

efficacy of vardenafil across strains. To determin e whether the beneficial effect of vardenafil treatment on 

memory reflects a selective re -engagement of memory engram cells during recall, we quantified neurons 

expressing mCherry, cFos and their colocalization (Fig. 3C). The total numbers of mCherry+ or c Fos+ cells did not 

differ between groups (Figs. 3D -E; two -way ANOVA, interaction: N.S.; n = 9 –12). By contrast, SD mice treated with 

vardenafil showed significantly higher colocalization with respect to mice that were SD with impaired OLM recall 

(Fig. 3F;  two -way ANOVA, interaction: F1.35 = 4.458, p = 0.0420; post -hoc Bonferroni: SD -vehicle vs. NSD -vehicle 

p = 0.0119, SD -vehicle vs. NSD -vardenafil p = 0.0179, SD -vehicle vs. SD -vardenafil p = 0.0119; n = 9 –12). 

Taken together, these findings suggest that SD disrupts memory accessibility by reducing engram cell 

reactivation, rather than altering overall cFos activity in the DG, thereby impairing the retrieval of previously 

encoded memories. Moreover, these data al so suggest that vardenafil has beneficial effects on memory retrieval 

following SD. These effects are not driven by a global increase in neuronal activity within the DG, but rather by the 

selective reactivation of the specific neuronal ensemble necessary f or appropriate memory recall to occur. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

Figure 3. Vardenafil treatment rescues object -location memory deficits caused by sleep deprivation. 

(A)  Diagram to explain the experimental procedure, n=19.  (B)  OLM performance. Left: discrimination (d2) index. Only the 

combined treatment group performed above chance during the test session. Right: During testing, NSD controls and SD -

vardenafil mice preferred the relocated object, whereas SD -vehicle mice failed to  discriminate. Raw values are presented 

for ease of interpretation; however, statistical analysis for the right panel was performed on log₁₀ -transformed data to satisfy 

normality assumptions.  (C)  DG engram cell analysis. Representative coronal sections showing mCherry+ (red), cFos+ 

(green), and colocalized cells (yellow; scale bar:50 μm; C).  (D -E)  Total percentages of mCherry+ and cFos+ cells did not 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 

Optogenetic DG engram stimulation followed by vardenafil treatment leads to persistent memory recovery 

by increasing engram reactivation. 

In the present study, successful memory retrieval in sleep -deprived mice was observed when vardenafil 

treatment immediately preceded the retrieval test. We therefore aimed to persistently restore long -term access 

to OLM, enabling successful natural recall  days after intervention. Akkerman et al. 39 , established that transient 

short -term memories in rodents can be converted into more robust memories through systemic treatment with 

PDE5 inhibitors within 0 -45 minutes following training, corresponding to the early consolidation window 39 . We 

therefore combined optogenetic reactivation of the OLM engram formed under SD with subsequent systemic 

administration of the PDE5 inhibitor vardenafil to determine whether this approach could enable lasting retrieval 

of the memory and promote a more  natural recall ( i.e. , without the need for additional optogenetic stimulation or 

drug treatment prior to testing days later). To address this, mice were subjected to 6 hours of SD following training. 

Three days later, animals were subjected to one of the  three experimental conditions: (1) laser ON followed by i.p. 

vehicle injection (ON_veh), (2) laser OFF followed by vardenafil i.p. injection (OFF_Vard), or (3) laser ON followed 

by vardenafil i.p. injection (ON_Vard). Two days after treatment, mice underwe nt the test trial (Fig.4A). In our study, 

the “learning episode” is replaced by optogenetic reactivation of the engram, which is then reconsolidated in the 

presence of boosted cGMP signaling. During the training trial, all mice explored both objects equall y, showing no 

preference for either object (Fig. S6C; Two -way RM ANOVA, N.S.). Mice that received solely optogenetic 

stimulation or vardenafil treatment failed to detect the spatial novelty indicating that they failed to recall the 

previously acquired spat ial memories. In contrast, mice receiving the combined treatment performed above 

chance level during testing suggesting that they successfully detected the spatial novelty (Fig. 3D; One -way 

ANOVA, F 2,29  = 7.383, p = 0.0026; one -sample t -test vs. chance: ON _vard, t 10  = 4.966, p = 0.0006; OFF_vard and 

ON_veh: N.S.). Post -hoc comparisons further demonstrated that ON_vard mice exhibited significantly higher 

discrimination index values than both OFF_vard (p = 0.0328) and ON_veh conditions (p = 0.0016). Analysis of 

explora tion time of objects corroborated these findings: mice that received only one of the two treatments 

explored the relocated and non -relocated objects equally (Fig. 3B left: OFF_vard and ON_veh: N.S.). A significant 

interaction between condition an d target emerged (Two -way RM ANOVA, F 2,29  = 7.303, p = 0.0027), and post hoc 

analyses indicated that the combined treatment group exhibited significantly greater exploration of the relocated 

object relative to the non -relocated one (ON_vard, p = 0.0001). Consistent with our expectations, vardenaf il 

treatment alone failed to produce a lasting recovery of memory, as cGMP elevation in the absence of memory -

related neural activation is insufficient to drive reconsolidation processes 37 .

To determine whether restored OLM was associated with altered engram reactivation in the DG, we 

quantified mCherry ⁺, cFos ⁺, and double -labeled mCherry ⁺:cFos ⁺ neurons (Fig. 4C). The numbers of mCherry ⁺ and 

cFos ⁺ cells did not differ across conditions (Fig. 4D -E; N.S.). In contrast, engram reactivation, indexed by 

mCherry ⁺cFos ⁺ colabeling, was significantly increased in mice that received the combined treatment (Fig. 4F;              

> differ across groups. (F) Colocalization of mCherry+ and cFos+ cells was reduced in SD -vehicle mice, consistent with
> impaired engram reactivation. Data are presented as mean ± SEM. Statistical significance is denoted as */#p<0.05,
> **/##p<0.01, ***/###p<0.001, ****/####p<0.0001. #indicates significantly different from zero. Created using
> BioRender.com.
> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 

Kruskal –Wallis, H 2 = 9.833, p = 0.0029), with post -hoc test indicating greater overlap compared to both OFF_vard 

(p = 0.0099) and ON_veh (p = 0.0410). Together, these findings indicate that the combined approach enables a 

persistent recovery of access to memories formed unde r SD, facilitated by increased reactivation of DG engram 

cells in the absence of global changes in cFos activity. This not only builds on our previous observations but also 

corroborates the prevailing view that successful memory recall d epends on the selective reactivation of engram 

cells 94 –97 .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 

Figure 4. Combined optogenetic and vardenafil treatment leads to permanent memory recovery by increasing engram 

reactivation. (A)  Schematic representation of the experimental timeline.  (B)  Left: discrimination (d2) index (n = 9 –12 per 

group). Only the combined treatment group performed above chance during the test session.  Right: Exploration time of the 

two objects during recall. Only the combined treatment group preferentially explored the relocated object.  Raw values are 

presented for ease of interpretation; however, statistical analyses for the right panel were performed on log₁₀ -transformed 

data to satisfy normality assumptions.  (C)  Representative coronal brain section of the DG showing m Cherry (red signal; 

cells active during training), cFos (green signal; cells active during recall), and overlapping mCherry+cFos+ (yellow signal) 

in brain tissue of mice subjected to the experiment.  (D-E)  Quantification of mCherry ⁺ (F) and cFos ⁺ (G) cells over the total 

number of DAPI cells, showing no differences among groups (n=5 -9 per group).  (F)  Overlap of mCherry ⁺/cFos ⁺ cells, with 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

> significantly higher co -localization in the combined treatment group. Data are presented as mean ± SEM. *P≤0.05,
> **P≤0.01, ***P≤0.001, ****P≤0.0001. # indicates significantly different from chance level. Created using BioRender.com.

# Discussion 

This study demonstrates that SD selectively impairs memory retrievability by reducing the reactivation of DG 

engram cells without detectable alterations in global DG activity at the time of retrieval. Pharmacological 

enhancement of cGMP –PKG signaling using  vardenafil temporarily restored memory retrieval by supporting the 

reactivation of DG engram cells. Combining vardenafil treatment with optogenetic engram reactivation resulted 

in more persistent access of OLMs formed under SD conditions, highlighting the  role of engram cells' reactivation 

in memory reconsolidation. Whole -brain analysis revealed that SD -induced retrievability deficits extend beyond 

the hippocampus, impacting downstream cortical and subcortical regions critical for associative memory, which 

depend on hippocampal output to support effective recall. 

Vardenafil treatment: facilitation of memory recall and reconsolidation 

Enhancement of cGMP –PKG signaling using the PDE5 inhibitor vardenafil, administered immediately before 

testing, effectively restored memory retrieval in SD mice. PDE5 normally degrades cGMP and regulates the Nitric 

Oxide (NO) –cGMP/PKG pathway, which induce s cAMP response element -binding protein (CREB) phosphorylation 

and supports CREB -dependent LTP 99 –101 . By preventing cGMP breakdown, vardenafil elevates intracellular cGMP 

levels and promotes PKG activation, a signaling cascade known to enhance synaptic efficacy through AMPA 

receptor trafficking, specifically the phosphorylation and membrane insertion of  GluA1 - and GluA2 -containing 

subunits 102 . Notably, these mechanistic insights come from studies in which vardenafil was administered during 

memory consolidation. The role of cGMP –PKG signaling during memory retrieval remains largely unexplored. 

Nonetheless, it is plausible (but untested) that th ese cGMP –PKG –dependent processes might contribute to recall. 

In our study, the vardenafil -mediated memory rescue was  accompanied  by the selective reactivation of DG 

engram cells but not to a global increase in DG activity, highlighting a mechanism for rein stating access to stored 

memory traces. This finding aligns with earlier work showing that memories formed under SD conditions remain 

latent and recoverable through optogenetic engram reactivation or pharmacological enhancement of intracellular 

signaling 28 , including modulation of cAMP –PKA signaling via PDE4 inhibition 28  and protection of cGMP –PKG –

dependent processes during SD 42 . However, the effect of acute vardenafil treatment was only temporary, since it 

did not support successful memory recall days after administration. Therefore, to achieve a more enduring 

recovery of memory accessibility, vardenafil administration was combi ned with the optogenetic reactivation of 

memory engram cells. Vardenafil was administered immediately following optogenetic engram reactivation, 

viewing the optogenetic manipulation as an artificial re -learning episode. This strategy, which targets the 

rec onsolidation -like processes, resulted in a sustained, manipulation -free restoration of memory recall days 

later. This result is consistent with our previous study using the combined approach to rescue memories 

vulnerable to SD 28 . Importantly, the efficacy of this combined treatment seems to relate to the selective re -

engagement of memory -specific engram cells, further underscoring that the benefit was not due to a global 

increase in neuronal activity (as evidenced by the lack of  DG total cFos activity changes, Fig.4C -F). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

These findings align with the well -established notion that amnesia -like behavioral impairments typically 

arise from a transient inability to access stored memory traces, rather than from memory erasure. Specifically, 

such deficits are thought to reflect a  failure to reactivate the neuronal ensembles representing the original 

experience 97 . The observed reduction in DG engram cell reactivation during recall following SD is, therefore, highly 

consistent with the framework suggesting that successful retrieval depends on the re -engagement of the neuronal 

population active during initial encodi ng 103 . Given these considerations, a plausible explanation for the effects of 

the combinatorial approach during memory reconsolidation is that cGMP -PKG –mediated facilitation of synaptic 

receptor trafficking temporarily compensates for SD -induced consolidation  deficits. This may restore sufficient 

neuronal excitability to enable selective DG engram reactivation during memory recall several days later. 

Altogether, these findings position PDE5 inhibition as a useful strategy to facilitate engram -specific mechanism s

that restore memory accessibility after SD. Moreover, they strengthen the interpretation that pharmacological 

enhancement of cyclic nucleotide signaling restores function in compromised, rather than optimal, neural 

circuits, consistent with ours and othe r results showing enhancement beyond baseline performance only in SD 

animals 40,42,104 .

Distributed cortical –hippocampal network dysfunction after SD 

A major novelty of this study is the employment of whole -brain cFos mapping, which provided an unprecedented, 

system -level view of the network deficits during OLM recall induced by SD. These analyses revealed that 

successful OLM recall is associated with t he integrated engagement of a distributed memory -associative network 

encompassing both cortical and subcortical regions. This network engagement was disrupted in mice whose 

memories were rendered inaccessible by SD, as evidenced by significant reductions i n cFos density across key 

nodes involved in the circuitry. This suggests that the causes of SD -induced amnesia are not confined to the 

hippocampus but instead reflect a disrupted network  alteration  within the memory -associative circuit 11 . The 

hippocampus is situated at the core of this network, forming hierarchical circuits with the medial prefrontal 

cortex, entorhinal and perirhinal cortices, the retrosplenial cortex, and thalamic and subcortical structures 65,105 –

> 108

. Interestingly, mice with impaired retrieval of OLMs exhibited reduced activation of the retrosplenial (RSP) 

cortex. This finding is consistent with a growing body of evidence demonstrating the RSP’s essential role in 

integrating object and spatial inform ation 83 –85 . Moreover, the observation of attenuated activation in the anterior 

cingulate cortex and entorhinal cortex provides additional evidence that SD broadly perturbs functional integrity 

across the memory -associative network. The anterior cingulate cortex cont ributes to storing long -lasting object –

place representations, with neural activity patterns persisting over extended delays 86,87 , while the entorhinal 

cortex, particularly its lateral subdivision, plays a causal role in encoding and recalling object –location 

associations 109,110 . Collectively, these findings suggest that SD makes OLM memories inaccessible during recall 

by impairing the coordinated activation of the distributed cortical –hippocampal network required for accurate 

retrieval of associative representations. Our finding s further support the critical role of this network and identify 

the hippocampal formation as a central hub linking most retrieval -associated structures (T30SS; Fig. 2). 

Consistent with this, prior studies have shown that disruption of hippocampal output p athways selectively 

impairs memory retrieval, highlighting the essential role of hippocampal projections in coordinating downstream 

memory -related circuits 106,108 . Despite not emerging as the most differentially activated regions by cFos, 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

hippocampal output structures (including ProS, SUB, ENTl, and ENTm) exhibited extensive connectivity to nearly 

all T30SS. This architecture positions the hippocampal formation as a systems -level orchestrator capable of 

coordinating retrieval -related activi ty across both cortical and subcortical targets. The apparent dissociation 

between connectivity and overall cFos expression highlights an important aspect of network organization: regions 

that exert strong modulatory control over network dynamics may not e xhibit large changes in immediate early 

gene expression.  We propose that  within  these “silent orchestrators” (typically harboring memory engrams) , the 

relevant variable  is not total c Fos density that matters, but rather  the specific  engram reactivation . In the context 

of SD, subtle disruptions in these regions could lead to downstream hypoactivation and retrieval failure without 

necessitating detectable changes within themselves. Within this framework, the DG emerges as a compelling 

candidate for an upstr ea m bottleneck. By filtering information entering the hippocampus 111 , it plays a central role 

in learning, memory, spatial coding, and recall 93,112 –115 . Moreover, recent evidence indicates that bidirectional 

signaling between the DG and ENT is required to preserve synaptic memory engrams 93 . Disruption of this 

mechanism may therefore underlie impaired engram maintenance and the resulting deficits in memory recall 

following SD. This mechanism aligns with the concept that successful memory recall depends on the selective 

reactivation of specif ic memory engram cells distributed across interconnected brain regions 13,103,116 –119 .

Consistent with this, using engram -based approaches to selectively reactivate tagged memory traces, we found 

that object –location information remains stored in the brain even when encoding occurs under sleep -deprived 

conditions. However, SD impaired the  natural reactivation of DG engram cells during recall, resulting in retrieval 

failure. Notably, pharmacological treatment with vardenafil (either alone or in combination with optogenetic 

stimulation) restored the reactivation of DG engram cells and rescued  memory retrieval. These findings indicate 

that SD -induced amnesia reflects a disruption in the reactivation of DG memory engram rather than a loss of the 

stored memory trace itself. Given that engram ensembles are distributed across multiple regions of th e altered 

memory -associative circuit, an important question for future work is whether similar SD -induced disruptions and 

pharmacological rescue mechanisms occur in other sparse engram ensembles throughout this circuit. 

Translational implications and future directions 

Collectively, these findings underscore vardenafil as a promising strategy to mitigate SD –induced memory 

impairments, with potential relevance to other conditions characterized by deficits in memory retrieval, including 

Alzheimer’s disease and infantile am nesia. As an FDA -approved PDE5 inhibitor with a well -established safety 

profile and robust pro -cognitive effects in preclinical models (including both sexes and aged animals) vardenafil 

provides a strong rationale for clinical translation in memory -related  disorders 41 . Nonetheless, several important 

questions remain. Future investigations should explore whether vardenafil’s restorative effects extend beyond 

the hippocampus to reestablish functional connectivity among distributed network hubs and rescue engram 

reactivat ion in associative regions important for memory recall such as the RSP, ENT, ACA and VIS, thereby 

advancing our understanding of network -level mechanisms of action. Moreover, the precise molecular 

mechanisms underlying vardenafil’s pro -cognitive effects re main to be fully elucidated. For instance, it remains 

unclear whether its facilitation of memory retrieval requires downstream engagement of the cAMP –PKA signaling 

pathway (as for the consolidation period) or other intracellular cascades beyond the primary  cGMP –PKG axis. 

Furthermore, the long -term stability of memory traces rescued by the combined approach warrant additional 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

study, particularly to determine whether alternative or compensatory circuits are recruited relative to natural 

recall. Finally, given its encouraging outcomes in preclinical studies and potential relevance to Alzheimer’s 

disease 99,101,120 –122 , future research should rigorously assess the durability, generalizability, and translational 

potential of vardenafil across diverse memory paradigms and pathological populations. Overall, this study 

positions vardenafil as a compelling therapeutic candid ate to restore memory function following SD and may lay 

the groundwork for the development of new therapeutic approaches to treat the cognitive deficits that are a 

debilitating component of many neurocognitive disorders associated with sleep loss and sleep  disturbances. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

# References 

1.  Brodt, S., Inostroza, M., Niethard, N. & Born, J. Sleep —A brain -state serving systems memory consolidation. 

Neuron  111 , 1050 –1075 (2023). 

2.  Klinzing, J. G., Niethard, N. & Born, J. Mechanisms of systems memory consolidation during sleep.  Nat. 

Neurosci.  22 , 1598 –1610 (2019). 

3.  Rasch, B. & Born, J. About sleep’s role in memory.  Physiol. Rev.  93 , 681 –766 (2013). 

4.  Gais, S., Lucas, B. & Born, J. Sleep after learning aids memory recall.  Learn. Mem.  13 , 259 –262 (2006). 

5.  Wang, C.  et al.  Chronic sleep deprivation exacerbates cognitive and synaptic plasticity impairments in 

APP/PS1 transgenic mice.  Behav. Brain Res.  412 , 113400 (2021). 

6.  Chattu, V. K.  et al.  The global problem of insufficient sleep and its serious public health implications. 

Healthc. Switz.  7, (2019). 

7.  Chen, P., Ban, W., Wang, W., You, Y. & Yang, Z. The Devastating Effects of Sleep Deprivation on Memory: 

Lessons from Rodent Models.  Clocks Sleep  5, 276 –294 (2023). 

8.  Heckman, P. R. A., Roig Kuhn, F., Meerlo, P. & Havekes, R. A brief period of sleep deprivation negatively 

impacts the acquisition, consolidation, and retrieval of object -location memories.  Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 

175 , 107326 (2020). 

9.  Krause, A. J.  et al.  The sleep -deprived human brain.  Nat. Rev. Neurosci.  18 , 404 –418 (2017). 

10.  Zamore, Z. & Veasey, S. C. Neural consequences of chronic sleep disruption.  Trends Neurosci.  45 , 678 –691 

(2022). 

11.  Dixsaut, L. & Gräff, J. Brain -wide screen of prelimbic cortex inputs reveals a functional shift during early fear 

memory consolidation.  eLife  11 , (2022). 

12.  Franceschini, A.  et al.  Brain -wide neuron quantification toolkit reveals strong sexual dimorphism in the 

evolution of fear memory.  Cell Rep.  42 , (2023). 

13.  Roy, D. S.  et al.  Brain -wide mapping reveals that engrams for a single memory are distributed across 

multiple brain regions.  Nat. Commun.  13 , (2022). 

14.  Chiaruttini, N.  et al.  ABBA+BraiAn, an integrated suite for whole -brain mapping, reveals brain -wide 

differences in immediate -early genes induction upon learning.  Cell Rep.  44 , (2025). 

15.  Borcuk, C.  et al.  Early memory deficits and extensive brain network disorganization in the AppNL -F/MAPT 

double knock -in mouse model of familial Alzheimer’s disease.  Aging Brain  2, (2022). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 

16.  Cai, G.  et al.  Brain -wide mapping of c -Fos expression with fluorescence micro -optical sectioning 

tomography in a chronic sleep deprivation mouse model.  Neurobiol. Stress  20 , (2022). 

17.  Urushihata, T.  et al.  Evaluation of cellular activity in response to sleep deprivation by a comprehensive 

analysis of the whole mouse brain.  Front. Neurosci.  17 , (2023). 

18.  Vetere, G.  et al.  Chemogenetic Interrogation of a Brain -wide Fear Memory Network in Mice.  Neuron  94 , 363 -

374.e4 (2017). 

19.  Wheeler, A. L.  et al.  Identification of a Functional Connectome for Long -Term Fear Memory in Mice.  PLoS 

Comput. Biol.  9, (2013). 

20.  Abel, T., Havekes, R., Saletin, J. M. & Walker, M. P. Sleep, plasticity and memory from molecules to whole -

brain networks.  Curr. Biol.  23 , R774 –R788 (2013). 

21.  Havekes, R., Vecsey, C. G. & Abel, T. The impact of sleep deprivation on neuronal and glial signaling 

pathways important for memory and synaptic plasticity.  Cell. Signal.  24 , 1251 –1260 (2012). 

22.  Havekes, R., Meerlo, P. & Abel, T. Animal Studies on the Role of Sleep in Memory: From Behavioral 

Performance to Molecular Mechanisms.  Curr. Top. Behav. Neurosci.  25 , 183 –206 (2015). 

23.  Havekes, R. & Abel, T. The tired hippocampus: the molecular impact of sleep deprivation on hippocampal 

function.  Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.  44 , 13 –19 (2017). 

24.  Havekes, R. & Aton, S. J. Impacts of Sleep Loss versus Waking Experience on Brain Plasticity: Parallel or 

Orthogonal?  Trends Neurosci.  43 , 385 –393 (2020). 

25.  Kreutzmann, J. C., Havekes, R., Abel, T. & Meerlo, P. Sleep deprivation and hippocampal vulnerability: 

Changes in neuronal plasticity, neurogenesis and cognitive function.  Neuroscience  309 , 173 –190 (2015). 

26.  Raven, F., Van der Zee, E. A., Meerlo, P. & Havekes, R. The role of sleep in regulating structural plasticity and 

synaptic strength: Implications for memory and cognitive function.  Sleep Med. Rev.  39 , 3 –11 (2018). 

27.  Sawangjit, A.  et al.  The hippocampus is crucial for forming non -hippocampal long -term memory during 

sleep.  Nature  564 , 109 –113 (2018). 

28.  Bolsius, Y. G.  et al.  Recovering object -location memories after sleep deprivation -induced amnesia.  Curr. 

Biol.  33 , 298 -308.e5 (2023). 

29.  Havekes, R.  et al.  Compartmentalized PDE4A5 Signaling Impairs Hippocampal Synaptic Plasticity and Long -

Term Memory.  J. Neurosci.  36 , 8936 –8946 (2016). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

30.  Raven, F., Meerlo, P., Van der Zee, E. A., Abel, T. & Havekes, R. A brief period of sleep deprivation causes 

spine loss in the dentate gyrus of mice.  Neurobiol. Learn. Mem.  160 , 83 –90 (2019). 

31.  Tudor, J. C.  et al.  Sleep deprivation impairs memory by attenuating mTORC1 -dependent protein synthesis. 

Sci. Signal.  9, (2016). 

32.  Vecsey, C. G.  et al.  Sleep deprivation impairs cAMP signalling in the hippocampus.  Nature  461 , 1122 –1125 

(2009). 

33.  Weiss, J. T. & Donlea, J. M. Roles for Sleep in Neural and Behavioral Plasticity: Reviewing Variation in the 

Consequences of Sleep Loss.  Front. Behav. Neurosci.  15 , (2022). 

34.  Wong, L. W., Tann, J. Y., Ibanez, C. F. & Sajikumar, S. The p75 neurotrophin receptor is an essential mediator 

of impairments in hippocampal -dependent associative plasticity and memory induced by sleep deprivation. 

J. Neurosci.  39 , 5452 –5465 (2019). 

35.  Yang, G.  et al.  Sleep promotes branch -specific formation of dendritic spines after learning.  Science  344 ,

1173 –1178 (2014). 

36.  Acquarone, E.  et al.  Synaptic and memory dysfunction induced by tau oligomers is rescued by up -regulation 

of the nitric oxide cascade.  Mol. Neurodegener.  14 , (2019). 

37.  Bollen, E.  et al.  Improved long -term memory via enhancing cGMP -PKG signaling requires cAMP -PKA 

signaling.  Neuropsychopharmacology  39 , 2497 –2505 (2014). 

38.  Kleppisch, T. & Feil, R. cGMP Signalling in the Mammalian Brain: Role in Synaptic Plasticity and Behaviour. 

in 549 –579 (2009). doi:10.1007/978 -3-540 -68964 -5_24. 

39.  Akkerman, S., Blokland, A. & Prickaerts, J. Possible overlapping time frames of acquisition and 

consolidation phases in object memory processes: a pharmacological approach. 

https://doi.org/10.1101/lm.040162 (2015) doi:10.1101/lm.040162. 

40.  Akkerman, S.  et al.  PDE5 inhibition improves acquisition processes after learning via a central mechanism. 

Neuropharmacology  97 , 233 –239 (2015). 

41.  Dadomo, H., Ponzi, D., Paterlini, S., Parmigiani, S. & Palanza, P. Vardenafil Long -Term Administration 

Improves Episodic Memory in Aging Female Mice.  Appl. Sci.  13 , 12470 (2023). 

42.  Heckman, P. R. A.  et al.  Phosphodiesterase inhibitors roflumilast and vardenafil prevent sleep deprivation -

induced deficits in spatial pattern separation.  Synapse  74 , 1 –6 (2020). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

43.  Sarma, A., Ronde, M., Smit, S., Meerlo, P. & Havekes, R. Does It Matter What Keeps You Awake? Effects of 

Two Different Sleep Deprivation Methods on Object ‐Location Memory and Hippocampal  C‐FOS  Expression 

in Mice.  J. Sleep Res.  e70079 (2025) doi:10.1111/jsr.70079. 

44.  Friard, O. & Gamba, M. <scp>BORIS</scp>  : a free, versatile open ‐source event ‐logging software for 

video/audio coding and live observations.  Methods Ecol. Evol.  7, 1325 –1330 (2016). 

45.  Raven, F., Heckman, P. R. A., Havekes, R. & Meerlo, P. Sleep deprivation -induced impairment of memory 

consolidation is not mediated by glucocorticoid stress hormones.  J. Sleep Res.  29 , (2020). 

46.  Ruskin, D. N., Dunn, K. E., Billiot, I., Bazan, N. G. & LaHoste, G. J. Eliminating the adrenal stress response 

does not affect sleep deprivation -induced acquisition deficits in the water maze.  Life Sci.  78 , 2833 –2838 

(2006). 

47.  Tiba, P. A.  et al.  Glucocorticoids Are Not Responsible for Paradoxical Sleep Deprivation -Induced Memory 

Impairments Metyrapone and Memory Impairment in Sleep Deprived Rats . SLEEP  vol. 31 (2008). 

48.  van der Borght, K.  et al.  Hippocampal cell proliferation across the day: Increase by running wheel activity, 

but no effect of sleep and wakefulness.  Behav. Brain Res.  167 , 36 –41 (2006). 

49.  Sarma, A. & Havekes, R. Sleep and memory: Elucidating the effects of sleep deprivation on different types 

of memory. in  Learning and Memory: A Comprehensive Reference  599 –624 (Elsevier, 2025). 

doi:10.1016/B978 -0-443 -15754 -7.00048 -1. 

50.  Meerlo, P., de Bruin, E. A., Strijkstra, A. M. & Daan, S. A social conflict increases EEG slow -wave activity 

during subsequent sleep.  Physiol. Behav.  73 , 331 –335 (2001). 

51.  Bogovic, J. A., Hanslovsky, P., Wong, A. & Saalfeld, S. Robust registration of calcium images by learned 

contrast synthesis. in  2016 IEEE 13th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI)  1123 –1126 

(IEEE, 2016). doi:10.1109/ISBI.2016.7493463. 

52.  Carey, H.  et al.  DeepSlice: rapid fully automatic registration of mouse brain imaging to a volumetric atlas. 

Nat. Commun.  14 , (2023). 

53.  Klein, S., Staring, M., Murphy, K., Viergever, M. A. & Pluim, J. elastix: A Toolbox for Intensity -Based Medical 

Image Registration.  IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging  29 , 196 –205 (2010). 

54.  Shamonin, D. P.  et al.  Fast parallel image registration on CPU and GPU for diagnostic classification of 

Alzheimer’s disease.  Front. Neuroinformatics  7, (2014). 

55.  Bankhead, P.  et al.  QuPath: Open source software for digital pathology image analysis.  Sci. Rep.  7, (2017). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

56.  Krishnan, A., Williams, L. J., McIntosh, A. R. & Abdi, H. Partial Least Squares (PLS) methods for 

neuroimaging: A tutorial and review.  NeuroImage  56 , 455 –475 (2011). 

57.  Bienkowski, M. S.  et al.  Integration of gene expression and brain -wide connectivity reveals the multiscale 

organization of mouse hippocampal networks.  Nat. Neurosci.  21 , 1628 –1643 (2018). 

58.  Derdikman, D. & Moser, E. I. A manifold of spatial maps in the brain.  Trends Cogn. Sci.  14 , 561 –569 (2010). 

59.  O’Keefe, J. & Dostrovsky, J. The hippocampus as a spatial map. Preliminary evidence from unit activity in the 

freely -moving rat.  Brain Res.  34 , 171 –175 (1971). 

60.  Tse, D.  et al.  Schemas and Memory Consolidation.  Science  316 , 76 –82 (2007). 

61.  Whitlock, J. R., Pfuhl, G., Dagslott, N., Moser, M. -B. & Moser, E. I. Functional Split between Parietal and 

Entorhinal Cortices in the Rat.  Neuron  73 , 789 –802 (2012). 

62.  Wu, D. & Zhang, J. In vivo mapping of macroscopic neuronal projections in the mouse hippocampus using 

high -resolution diffusion MRI.  NeuroImage  125 , 84 –93 (2016). 

63.  Zemla, R. & Basu, J. Hippocampal function in rodents.  Curr. Opin. Neurobiol.  43 , 187 –197 (2017). 

64.  O’Keefe, J. How the Hippocampal Cognitive Map Supports Flexible Navigation. (2025). 

65.  Llewellyn, T., Zheng, H., Liu, X., Xu, B. & Patel, K. P. Median preoptic nucleus and subfornical organ drive 

renal sympathetic nerve activity via a glutamatergic mechanism within the paraventricular nucleus.  Am. J. 

Physiol. -Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol.  302 , R424 –R432 (2012). 

66.  Liu, D.  et al.  A Hypothalamic Circuit Underlying the Dynamic Control of Social Homeostasis. (2025). 

67.  Brecht, M. & Sakmann , B. Whisker maps of neuronal subclasses of the rat ventral posterior medial 

thalamus, identified by whole ‐cell voltage recording and morphological reconstruction.  J. Physiol.  538 , 495 –

515 (2002). 

68.  Dobolyi, A., Cservenák, M. & Young, L. J. Thalamic integration of social stimuli regulating parental behavior 

and the oxytocin system.  Front. Neuroendocrinol.  51 , 102 –115 (2018). 

69.  Hintiryan, H.  et al.  Distinct subnetworks of the mouse anterior thalamic nuclei.  Nat. Commun.  16 , 6018 

(2025). 

70.  Hsu, Y. -W. A.  et al.  Role of the Dorsal Medial Habenula in the Regulation of Voluntary Activity, Motor 

Function, Hedonic State, and Primary Reinforcement.  J. Neurosci.  34 , 11366 –11384 (2014). 

71.  Cechetto, D. F. & Saper, C. B. Evidence for a viscerotopic sensory representation in the cortex and thalamus 

in the rat.  J. Comp. Neurol.  262 , 27 –45 (1987). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

72.  Hooks, B. M. Sensorimotor Convergence in Circuitry of the Motor Cortex.  The Neuroscientist  23 , 251 –263 

(2017). 

73.  Leinweber, M., Ward, D. R., Sobczak, J. M., Attinger, A. & Keller, G. B. A Sensorimotor Circuit in Mouse Cortex 

for Visual Flow Predictions.  Neuron  95 , 1420 -1432.e5 (2017). 

74.  Lohse, M., Dahmen, J. C., Bajo, V. M. & King, A. J. Subcortical circuits mediate communication between 

primary sensory cortical areas in mice.  Nat. Commun.  12 , 3916 (2021). 

75.  Makino, H., Hwang, E. J., Hedrick, N. G. & Komiyama, T. Circuit Mechanisms of Sensorimotor Learning. 

Neuron  92 , 705 –721 (2016). 

76.  Mukherjee, N., Wachutka, J. & Katz, D. B. Impact of precisely -timed inhibition of gustatory cortex on taste 

behavior depends on single -trial ensemble dynamics.  eLife  8, e45968 (2019). 

77.  Nelson, A.  et al.  A Circuit for Motor Cortical Modulation of Auditory Cortical Activity.  J. Neurosci.  33 , 14342 –

14353 (2013). 

78.  Nelson, A. & Mooney, R. The Basal Forebrain and Motor Cortex Provide Convergent yet Distinct Movement -

Related Inputs to the Auditory Cortex.  Neuron  90 , 635 –648 (2016). 

79.  Wang, Q.  et al.  The Allen Mouse Brain Common Coordinate Framework: A 3D Reference Atlas.  Cell  181 , 936 -

953.e20 (2020). 

80.  Knox, J. E.  et al.  High -resolution data -driven model of the mouse connectome.  Netw. Neurosci.  3, 217 –236 

(2018). 

81.  Weigert, M. & Schmidt, U. Nuclei Instance Segmentation and Classification in Histopathology Images with 

Stardist. in  2022 IEEE International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging Challenges (ISBIC)  1–4 (IEEE, 2022). 

doi:10.1109/ISBIC56247.2022.9854534. 

82.  Czajkowski, R.  et al.  Encoding and storage of spatial information in the retrosplenial cortex.  Proc. Natl. 

Acad. Sci.  111 , 8661 –8666 (2014). 

83.  Lin, X.  et al.  Projection -specific circuits of retrosplenial cortex with differential contributions to spatial 

cognition.  Mol. Psychiatry  30 , 2068 –2084 (2025). 

84.  Sheppard, P. A. S., Oomen, C. A., Bussey, T. J. & Saksida, L. M. The Granular Retrosplenial Cortex Is 

Necessary in Male Rats for Object -Location Associative Learning and Memory, But Not Spatial Working 

Memory or Visual Discrimination and Reversal, in the  Touchscreen Operant Chamber.  eneuro  11 ,

ENEURO.0120 -24.2024 (2024). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 

85.  Weible, A. P., Rowland, D. C., Pang, R. & Kentros, C. Neural Correlates of Novel Object and Novel Location 

Recognition Behavior in the Mouse Anterior Cingulate Cortex.  J. Neurophysiol.  102 , 2055 –2068 (2009). 

86.  Weible, A. P., Rowland, D. C., Monaghan, C. K., Wolfgang, N. T. & Kentros, C. G. Neural Correlates of Long -

Term Object Memory in the Mouse Anterior Cingulate Cortex.  J. Neurosci.  32 , 5598 –5608 (2012). 

87.  Aggleton, J. P. & Christiansen, K. The subiculum. in 65 –82 (2015). doi:10.1016/bs.pbr.2015.03.003. 

88.  Hernández -Frausto, M. & Vivar, C. Entorhinal cortex –hippocampal circuit connectivity in health and 

disease.  Front. Hum. Neurosci.  18 , (2024). 

89.  Ohara, S.  et al.  Hippocampal -medial entorhinal circuit is differently organized along the dorsoventral axis in 

rodents.  Cell Rep.  42 , 112001 (2023). 

90.  O’Mara, S. M., Commins, S., Anderson, M. & Gigg, J. The subiculum: a review of form, physiology and 

function.  Prog. Neurobiol.  64 , 129 –155 (2001). 

91.  Witter, M. P., Doan, T. P., Jacobsen, B., Nilssen, E. S. & Ohara, S. Architecture of the Entorhinal Cortex A 

Review of Entorhinal Anatomy in Rodents with Some Comparative Notes.  Front. Syst. Neurosci.  11 , (2017). 

92.  Carretero -Guillén, A.  et al.  Dentate gyrus is needed for memory retrieval.  Mol. Psychiatry  29 , 2939 –2950 

(2024). 

93.  Chapman, D. P., Power, S. D., Vicini, S., Ryan, T. J. & Burns, M. P. Amnesia after Repeated Head Impact Is 

Caused by Impaired Synaptic Plasticity in the Memory Engram.  J. Neurosci.  44 , (2024). 

94.  Perusini, J. N.  et al.  Optogenetic stimulation of dentate gyrus engrams restores memory in Alzheimer’s 

disease mice.  Hippocampus  27 , 1110 –1122 (2017). 

95.  Roy, D. S.  et al.  Memory Retrieval by Activating Engram Cells in Mouse Models of Early Alzheimer’s Disease .

www.nature.com/nature. (2016). 

96.  Ryan, T. J., Roy, D. S., Pignatelli, M., Arons, A. & Tonegawa, S. Engram cells retain memory under retrograde 

amnesia.  Science  348 , 1007 –1013 (2015). 

97.  Ramirez, S.  et al.  Creating a False Memory in the Hippocampus.  Science  341 , 387 –391 (2013). 

98.  Heckman, P. R. A., Wouters, C. & Prickaerts, J. Phosphodiesterase Inhibitors as a Target for Cognition 

Enhancement in Aging and Alzheimer’s Disease: A Translational Overview.  Curr. Pharm. Des.  21 , 317 –331 

(2014). 

99.  Lu, Y. -F., Kandel, E. R. & Hawkins, R. D. Nitric Oxide Signaling Contributes to Late -Phase LTP and CREB 

Phosphorylation in the Hippocampus.  J. Neurosci.  19 , 10250 –10261 (1999). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32 

100.  Prickaerts, J., Heckman, P. R. A. & Blokland, A. Investigational phosphodiesterase inhibitors in phase I and 

phase II clinical trials for Alzheimer’s disease.  Expert Opin. Investig. Drugs  26 , 1033 –1048 (2017). 

101.  Argyrousi, E. K.  et al.  Pro -cognitive effect of upregulating cyclic guanosine monophosphate signalling during 

memory acquisition or early consolidation is mediated by increased AMPA receptor trafficking.  J. 

Psychopharmacol. (Oxf.)  34 , 103 –114 (2020). 

102.  Josselyn, S. A. & Tonegawa, S. Memory engrams: Recalling the past and imagining the future.  Science  367 ,

(2020). 

103.  Argyrousi, E. K., Heckman, P. R. A. & Prickaerts, J. Role of cyclic nucleotides and their downstream signaling 

cascades in memory function: Being at the right time at the right spot.  Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.  113 , 12 –38 

(2020). 

104.  Chao, O. Y., de Souza Silva, M. A., Yang, Y. M. & Huston, J. P. The medial prefrontal cortex  - hippocampus 

circuit that integrates information of object, place and time to construct episodic memory in rodents: 

Behavioral, anatomical and neurochemical prop erties.  Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.  113 , 373 –407 (2020). 

105.  Cinalli, D. A.  et al.  <scp>DREADD</scp>  ‐inactivation of dorsal <scp>CA1</scp > pyramidal neurons in mice 

impairs retrieval of object and spatial memories.  Hippocampus  33 , 6 –17 (2023). 

106.  Facundo Morici, J., Weisstaub, N. V. & Zold, C. L. Hippocampal -medial prefrontal cortex network dynamics 

predict performance during retrieval in a context -guided object memory task. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas 

(2022) doi:10.1073/pnas. 

107.  Stackman, R. W., Cohen, S. J., Lora, J. C. & Rios, L. M. Temporary inactivation reveals that the CA1 region of 

the mouse dorsal hippocampus plays an equivalent role in the retrieval of long -term object memory and 

spatial memory.  Neurobiol. Learn. Mem.  133 , 118 –128 (2016). 

108.  Tozzi, F.  et al.  Involvement of a lateral entorhinal cortex engram in episodic -like memory recall.  Cell Rep.  43 ,

114795 (2024). 

109.  Wilson, D. I. G., Watanabe, S., Milner, H. & Ainge, J. A. Lateral entorhinal cortex is necessary for associative 

but not nonassociative recognition memory.  Hippocampus  23 , 1280 –1290 (2013). 

110.  Havekes, R. & Abel, T. Chapter 1 Genetic Dissection of Neural Circuits and Behavior in Mus musculus.  Adv. 

Genet.  65 , 1 –38 (2009). 

111.  Aimone, J. B., Deng, W. & Gage, F. H. Resolving New Memories: A Critical Look at the Dentate Gyrus, Adult 

Neurogenesis, and Pattern Separation.  Neuron  70 , 589 –596 (2011). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

33 

112.  Hainmueller, T. & Bartos, M. Dentate gyrus circuits for encoding, retrieval and discrimination of episodic 

memories.  Nat. Rev. Neurosci.  21 , 153 –168 (2020). 

113.  Kesner, R. P., Taylor, J. O., Hoge, J. & Andy, F. Role of the dentate gyrus in mediating object -spatial 

configuration recognition.  Neurobiol. Learn. Mem.  118 , 42 –48 (2015). 

114.  Lee, I. & Solivan, F. Dentate gyrus is necessary for disambiguating similar object -place representations. 

Learn. Mem.  17 , 252 –258 (2010). 

115.  Denny, C. A., Lebois, E. & Ramirez, S. From Engrams to Pathologies of the Brain.  Front. Neural Circuits  11 ,

(2017). 

116.  Josselyn, S. A., Köhler, S. & Frankland, P. W. Finding the engram.  Nat. Rev. Neurosci.  16 , 521 –534 (2015). 

117.  Ortega -de San Luis, C. & Ryan, T. J. Understanding the physical basis of memory: Molecular mechanisms of 

the engram.  J. Biol. Chem.  298 , 101866 (2022). 

118.  Tonegawa, S., Pignatelli, M., Roy, D. S. & Ryan, T. J. Memory engram storage and retrieval.  Curr. Opin. 

Neurobiol.  35 , 101 –109 (2015). 

119.  Hainsworth, A. H., Arancio, O., Elahi, F. M., Isaacs, J. D. & Cheng, F. PDE5 inhibitor drugs for use in dementia. 

Alzheimers Dement. Transl. Res. Clin. Interv.  9, (2023). 

120.  Ricciarelli, R. Erectile Dysfunction Drugs as Potential Therapy for Cognitive Decline: Preclinical and 

Translational Evidence.  Cells  14 , 1505 (2025). 

121.  Zuccarello, E.  et al.  Development of novel phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitors for the therapy of Alzheimer’s 

disease.  Biochem. Pharmacol.  176 , (2020). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted March 26, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.03.24.713921 doi: bioRxiv preprint

34 

# Acknowledgments 

The authors thank Roeland Lokhorst (Microscopy Facility, Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, Amsterdam, 

The Netherlands) and Sébastien Courrier (Ingénieur d’étude, Équipe Myologie Translationnelle; Responsable 

Plateforme Imagerie, INSERM U1251, Aix -Mar seille Université, Faculté de Médecine Timone, Marseille, France) 

for expert assistance with image acquisition.  We  also acknowledge the veterinary staff and animal care personnel 

of the University of Groningen animal facility for their support with animal  breeding and care.  We  further thank all 

current and former members of the Havekes and Silva laboratories for their valuable feedback on the project. 

# Funding 

This work was supported by the US Airforce Office of Scientific Research (Grant number FA9550 -21 -1-0310 to 

R.H.). The laboratory of BAS is supported by the European Research Council (ERC -2021 -STG 101042309), the 

Alzheimer’s Association (AARG -22 -974392), th e ANR (APP -2025 -TERM) and the Université Côte d'Azur. 

# Lead contact 

Further information and requests should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the lead contact,  Robbert Havekes: 

r.havekes@rug.nl 

# Declaration of interests 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

# Author contributions 

Conceptualization: CP, PM, RH, BAS 

Methodology: CP, CC, AS, RH, PM, BAS, EK, PRAH 

Investigation: CP, CC, DMP, ELM, OVH, EYGC, SW, NDV, LMR 

Visualization: CP, CC 

Funding acquisition: RH, BAS 

Project administration: RH, PM 

Supervision: PM, RH, BAS 

Writing  – original draft: CP, CC 

Writing  – review & editing: CP, CC, DMP, RH, PM, BAS, PRAH, EK